{"labeled": [2, 1, 2, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 0, 2, 1, 2, 0, 1, 0, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 0, 2, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 2, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 0, 2, 1, 1, 2, 2, 1, 2, 1, 2, 1, 1, 1, 2, 1, 2, 1, 2, 1, 2, 2, 2, 1, 2, 2, 2, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 1, 0, 2, 2, 2, 1, 1, 2, 2, 1, 0, 0, 2, 1, 2, 1, 1, 0, 2, 0, 1, 1, 1, 2, 1, 1, 1, 1, 2, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 0, 1, 1, 2, 1, 1, 2, 1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 2, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 2, 0, 2, 0, 2, 2, 1, 1, 1, 2, 0, 0, 0, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 0, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0, 2, 2, 2, 1, 2, 0, 1, 2, 1, 0, 1, 2, 2, 2, 0, 2, 2, 0, 0, 1, 1, 2, 2, 0, 2, 0, 2, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 2, 0, 1, 1, 2, 0, 2, 2, 2, 2, 1, 2, 1, 2, 2, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 2, 2, 0, 0, 2], "url_text": ["Ice wedge explained You are here Everything Explained.Today A-Z Contents I IC ICE ICE ICE W Ice wedge Ice wedge explained An ice wedge is a crack in the ground formed by a narrow or thin piece of ice that measures up to 3\u20134 meters in length at ground level and extends downwards into the ground up to several meters. During the winter months, the water in the ground freezes and expands. Once temperatures reach \u221217 degrees Celsius or lower, the ice that has already formed acts like a solid and expands to form cracks in the surface known as ice wedges. As this process continues over many years ice wedges can grow, up to the size of a swimming pool. Ice wedges usually appear in a polygonal pattern known as ice wedge polygons. The cracks can also be filled with materials other than ice, especially sand, and then they're called sand wedges. Formation There are many theories that attempt to explain the origin of ice wedges but only one has been consistently supported by most prominent scientists: the thermal contraction theory. Thermal contraction theory The thermal contraction theory states that during the winter months, thermal contraction cracks form only a few cm wide and a couple of metres deep because of the extreme cold weather.[1] Over the next few months, the snow melts and the remaining water fills the cracks and the permafrost below the surface freezes it. These tiny cracks turn into permafrost. Once the summer months arrive, the permafrost expands; horizontal compression produces upturning of the frozen sediment by plastic deformation. The next winter the cold refreezes and cracks the already forming ice wedge, opening a way for the melting snow of spring to fill the empty crack. The mean annual air temperature thought needed to form ice wedges is \u22126\u00b0 to \u22128\u00b0C or colder.[2] Forms There are three different forms of ice wedges: active, inactive and casts. All three forms are prevalent today and can be found in different parts of the world. Active Active ice wedges are those that are still evolving and growing. During each year, a layer of ice will be added if cracking occurs, but cracking need not occur every year to be considered active. The area in which most ice wedges remain active is along the permafrost zone. The number of active ice wedges that are cracking yearly is consistently declining as they become inactive.[3] Inactive Inactive ice wedges are wedges that are no longer cracking and growing. Throughout the winter months, the wedge does not split and therefore in the summer no new water is added.[3] Casts In areas of past permafrost, ice wedges have melted and are no longer filled with ice. The wedge, which is now empty, is filled with sediment and dirt from the surrounding walls. These are called ice wedge casts and are used to estimate the climate of hundreds of thousands of years ago. Types Ice wedges have historically been classified into two main categories: epigenetic and syngenetic[4] . The type of an ice wedges refer to the way in which the wedge grows over time. Relatively recent field studies have revealed a new type of ice wedge: anti-syngenetic. Currently, these are the only three distinctly classified types of ice wedges observed in nature[5] . The differences among the growth patterns of epigenetic, syngenetic and anti-syngenetic wedges then depend upon ground surface conditions, i.e. whether the ground level remains essentially unchanged or whether there is addition or loss of material[4] . Epigenetic \u2018Epigenetic\u2019 in geological terms refers to geological features that formed after the formation of the surrounding materials. In relation to ice wedges, this means that epigenetic ice wedges are found to form in preexisting permafrost, and are not formed at the same time as the permafrost meaning they are much younger than the surrounding material. An ice wedge being epigenetic also refers to the fashion in which they grow. These types of ice wedges grow considerably wider over their lifetime, but rarely any deeper or taller. This means that epigenetic ice wedges can grow to at most 3-5 meters in width, but stay roughly the same depth/height as when they had formed[6] . Typically, the sediments on either side of an epigenetic ice wedge, adjacent to the edges of the wedge exhibit upward bending. In an epigenetic ice wedge, the age of the ice on the periphery changes little from top to bottom. Syngenetic Syngenetic ice wedges, like the epigenetic variety, find their roots in the geological term syngenetic, which means forming at the same time as the surrounding material[6] . This is because syngenetic ice wedges grow as the upper permafrost surface rises in response to the addition of material on the ground surface[4] . This allows syngenetic ice wedges to grow very deep, as the surface around them rises with the accumulation of alluvium (in floodplains), peat (in tundra), and gelifluction deposits (at the bottom of a slope), among other materials[4] . Syngenetic ice wedges may only form if the thermal contraction and subsequent ice-veinlet growth can keep pace with the addition of new material. If this is the case, the ice wedge can reach depths of 25 meters, but the average is much less[6] . In a syngenetic ice wedge, the age of the ice on the periphery decreases upwards. Anti-Syngenetic Anti-syngenetic ice wedge were first observed in 1990 during the fieldwork of J. Ross Mackay. Mackay found that anti-syngenetic grew in conditions opposite to those of syngenetic ice wedges in that the anti-syngenetic variety required the removal of material instead of the accumulation and addition of material[4] . Anti-syngenetic ice wedges only form on slopes, where there is a net loss of materials erosion. Similar to syngenetic ice wedges, anti-syngenetic ice wedges can only occur if the rate of thermal contraction cracking and ice-veinlet growth keeps pace with the removal of active material[4] . Anti-syngenetic ice wedges therefore only grow downwards, penetrating deeper into the soil only as the upper layers are removed by mass wasting and erosion[4] . In an anti-syngenetic ice wedge, the age of the ice on the periphery increases upwards. Notes and References Web site: Ice wedges, polygons and pingos. 2006-02-14. 2008-05-26. U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service - Alaska. Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. yes. https://web.archive.org/web/20080518202351/http://arctic.fws.gov/permcycl.htm. 2008-05-18. Web site: Permafrost: Origins. Britannica Online Encyclopedia. 2008-05-26. Web site: Permafrost: Active wedges, inactive wedges, and ice-wedge casts. Britannica Online Encyclopedia. 2008-05-26. Mackay. J. Ross. 1990. Some observations on the growth and deformation of epigenetic, syngenetic and anti-syngenetic ice wedges.. Permafrost and Periglacoal Processes. 1. 15-29. Wiley. Hariprasad C. (2011) Epigenetic Ice. In: Singh V.P., Singh P., Haritashya U.K. (eds) Encyclopedia of Snow, Ice and Glaciers. Encyclopedia of Earth Sciences Series. Springer, Dordrecht Subcommittee, P., 1988. Glossary of permafrost and related ground-ice terms. Associate Committee on Geotechnical Research, National Research Council of Canada, Ottawa, 156. This article is licensed under the GNU Free Documentation License. It uses material from the Wikipedia article \"Ice wedge\". Except where otherwise indicated, Everything.Explained.Today is \u00a9 Copyright 2009-2018, A B Cryer, All Rights Reserved. Cookie policy.", "An Error Occurred Setting Your User Cookie An Error Occurred Setting Your User Cookie This site uses cookies to improve performance. If your browser does not accept cookies, you cannot view this site. Setting Your Browser to Accept Cookies There are many reasons why a cookie could not be set correctly. Below are the most common reasons: You have cookies disabled in your browser. You need to reset your browser to accept cookies or to ask you if you want to accept cookies. Your browser asks you whether you want to accept cookies and you declined. To accept cookies from this site, use the Back button and accept the cookie. Your browser does not support cookies. Try a different browser if you suspect this. The date on your computer is in the past. If your computer's clock shows a date before 1 Jan 1970, the browser will automatically forget the cookie. To fix this, set the correct time and date on your computer. You have installed an application that monitors or blocks cookies from being set. You must disable the application while logging in or check with your system administrator. Why Does this Site Require Cookies? This site uses cookies to improve performance by remembering that you are logged in when you go from page to page. To provide access without cookies would require the site to create a new session for every page you visit, which slows the system down to an unacceptable level. What Gets Stored in a Cookie? This site stores nothing other than an automatically generated session ID in the cookie; no other information is captured. In general, only the information that you provide, or the choices you make while visiting a web site, can be stored in a cookie. For example, the site cannot determine your email name unless you choose to type it. Allowing a website to create a cookie does not give that or any other site access to the rest of your computer, and only the site that created the cookie can read it.", "Category:Arctic geography terminology - Wikipedia Help Category:Arctic geography terminology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Pages in category \"Arctic geography terminology\" The following 34 pages are in this category, out of 34 total. This list may not reflect recent changes (learn more). A Active layer Arctic Basin Arctic haze Aufeis AuroraB Boreas PlainC Canadian Arctic tundra Cryosphere CryosuctionG Gas hydrate pingo Gelisol Greenland PlainH HummockM Midnight sun Molloy DeepN Novaya Zemlya effectP Patterned ground Permafrost Pingo Polar drift Polar night Polar route PolynyaS Sastrugi Septentrional Subarctic Syngenetic permafrost growthT Talik True north TundraV Polar vortexY Yedoma Yukon Ice PatchesZ Zero-curtain effect Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Category:Arctic_geography_terminology&oldid=745559137\" Categories: Geography terminologyGeography of the Arctic Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces CategoryTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata item Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version Languages \u0641\u0627\u0631\u0633\u06ccGaelgT\u00fcrk\u00e7e\u0627\u0631\u062f\u0648Ti\u1ebfng Vi\u1ec7t Edit links This page was last edited on 21 October 2016, at 21:11\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "Hockey Terminology | Weekend Warriors Hockey 1-814-673-2000 Home Camp Locations 2019 Camp Locations Ann Arbor 2019 Atlanta 2019 Boston 2019 Buffalo 2019 Lake Tahoe 2019 Minneapolis 2019 Morristown 2019 Pittsburgh 2019 Shelton 2019 Vail 2019 Washington, DC 2019 Potential New Locations About Camps Who Should Attend? New Players Experienced Players Women Goalies Testimonials Our Philosophy What You Get Typical Schedule Camp Types Download Brochure Cancellation/Change Policy Guarantee Scholarship Program FAQ Preparing for Camp Flying with Hockey Gear Coaches Coaches \u2013 General Attributes Coach Biographies Join Our Staff Pay Register for Camp Pay Camp Balance Player Dashboard Camp Gift Certificate Merchandise Payment Blog Resources Hockey Terminology Goalie Ebook Contact Hockey Terminology In reading post camp evaluations, one thing that has been requested, is for us to define some of the terminology that we use both on the ice and in our chalk talks.\u00a0 This makes sense.\u00a0 While those of you that have been playing and/or watching the game for years may be familiar with most of these terms, the newbie player may be hearing them for the first time.\u00a0 Not understanding the language quite naturally impedes the learning process, and that is the last thing we want.\u00a0\u00a0 Thus, we have created this dictionary of basic terminology.\u00a0 We will add new terms to the list periodically, as the need arises.\u00a0 Do you have a term you would like defined?\u00a0 E-mail rick@weekendwarriorshockey and we will do our best to define it and add it here. To have a little fun with this, in addition to the basic terminology required, there are also quite a few fun slang terms used by hockey players.\u00a0 While these slang terms may not be crucial in learning how to be a better player, they certainly help one become more understanding of the hockey culture.\u00a0 The regular terms are in black, and the slang terms are in red. Backchecking \u2013 The act of skating back to your defensive zone and applying pressure to opposing players when they have possession of the puck and are on the rush.\u00a0 We often joke \u201cwhat is backchecking\u201d, because adult league players are notorious for not being very motivated backcheckers.\u00a0 It should be noted that backchecking is NOT the act of checking someone in the back with your stick.\u00a0 That is known as cross checking, and is a penalty. Bar Down \u2013 A shot that hits the bottom of the crossbar and goes right down into the net.\u00a0 Such a shot is normally responsible for an enormous grin by the shooter and for oohs and aahs from everyone else (except maybe the goalie). Barn \u2013 A rink or arena.\u00a0 As in \u201cThey have to come play in our barn tonight.\u201d Beauty/Beautician \u2013 A player that is talented, both on and off the ice, and loved by his teammates. Bender \u2013 Short for ankle bender, a derogatory term for a player who bends his ankles when skating. Biscuit \u2013 The puck Break out:\u00a0When a team gains control of the puck in their defensive end they will \u201cbreak out\u201d with the puck to go on the attack. \u00a0 Most teams have established break out plays to accomplish this important part of the game. Celly \u2013 A celebration after a goal is scored Change on the fly: \u00a0A team may change its players even as play continues. This is known as \u201cchanging on the fly.\u201d A player coming on the rink cannot play the puck until the player they are replacing is off the rink. Cherry Picker \u2013\u00a0 A player who stays at center ice and does not help their team on defense. \u00a0They hope to pick up a break out pass with no defenders in their way. Chip \u2013 We normally use the term \u201cchip\u201d in the context of \u201cchip off the boards\u201d.\u00a0 This is where the puck is shot off the boards, normally up off the ice.\u00a0 The purpose could be to merely clear the puck out of the zone.\u00a0 More often it is a passing maneuver, where you are chipping the puck off the boards to a space where you expect your teammate to be able to get it.\u00a0 However, you can even chip it off the boards to yourself, as a means of getting around an opponent. Chirp \u2013 Trash talk directed at an opponent, the opposing team\u2019s bench, or the refs. Cycling: Cycling is an offensive strategy used to keep control of the puck by keeping it close the boards. Offensive players make short passes to each other along the boards until they see an opening to pass to a teammate who is moving into the slot for a shot. Deke (Deking):\u00a0A deke is used by an offensive player with the puck to confuse a defender or goalie. It is a fake or feint move. \u00a0A common deke is to lower the shoulder in one direction but actually turn in the other. Delayed Penalty \u2013 A penalty that has not yet resulted in a stoppage of play because the team that will have the man advantage is in possession of the puck.\u00a0 Play continues until the team being penalized gains control of the puck.\u00a0 The referee will raise his arm indicating that there is a delayed penalty situation.\u00a0 The team with possession will send their goalie off the ice in exchange for another attacker, as it would be nearly impossible for the penalized team to score, as play will stop when the penalized team gets the puck.\u00a0 This essentially extends the length of time the non-penalized team has the man advantage. If a goal is scored before the play is stopped, then the penalty is waived off. Dots \u2013 \u201cThe dots\u201d is short for face-off dots, or the dots into which the referee drops the puck during a face off. Dump and Chase \u2013 An\u00a0offensive strategy used to get the puck over the opposing team\u2019s blue line and into the corners where players can race to get it, thereby moving the play into the attacking zone. Flow \u2013 Great hockey hair.\u00a0 Typically longer hair that \u201cflows\u201d out of the helmet.\u00a0 A young Jaromir Jagr sported some great flow. Five hole:\u00a0The potential scoring areas around a goal are numbered from one to four starting in the lower right corner and proceeding clockwise at each corner of the net. \u00a0The \u201c5 hole\u201d is between the goalie\u2019s legs. Forecheck \u2013 Checking, battling or applying pressure to the opponent in an attempt to retrieve the puck while in your offensive zone when the other team has possession.\u00a0 Forecheck is also a hockey slang term.\u00a0 In the slang term, the meaning is one of approaching a member of the opposite sex, typically while out at the bar, in an attempt to solicit a phone number or date.\u00a0 As in:\u00a0 \u201cWhere\u2019s Joe?\u201d\u00a0 \u201cOh, he\u2019s up at the bar forechecking that entire bachelorette party.\u201d Game misconduct:\u00a0A player is suspended for the remainder of the game if they receive a game misconduct. \u00a0Their team continues to play at full strength unless a minor penalty is also assessed. Gordie Howe Hat Trick \u2013 A Gordie Howe\u00a0hat trick is a goal, an assist and a fight in a single game.\u00a0 Gordie Howe was both a prolific scorer, and a tough customer who was not afraid to drop the mitts. Grinder \u2013 A player who makes up for a lack of talent by working hard and playing physical.\u00a0 A grinder normally plays on the 3rd or 4th lines, and will battle hard for the puck. Grocery Stick \u2013 A player that sits on the bench the entire game between the forwards and the defensemen, acting like a separator you would use on the conveyor belt at the grocery store to separate your groceries from the next customer in line. Guts of the Ice \u2013 This is simply the area of the ice between the dots, over the entire length of the ice.\u00a0 We typically use this term in the context of \u201cdefending the guts of the ice\u201d.\u00a0 What we mean by that is that we want to keep attacking players from attacking our zone up the middle, or guts of the ice.\u00a0 Rather, we try to keep them \u201coutside the dots\u201d, meaning between the faceoff dots and the boards. Hand Pass \u2013 The act of passing the puck using one\u2019s hand. This is legal inside a team\u2019s defensive zone, but illegal in the neutral zone and attacking zone, even if the pass originates from another zone. Hash marks:\u00a0Hash marks are small lines, which are perpendicular to the edge of the face off circles. Players cannot encroach on the hash mark areas during face-offs. Hat Trick \u2013\u00a0When a player scores three goals in a game it is known as a hat trick. Three goals in a row is a \u201cpure\u201d hat trick.\u200b Headman the puck \u2013\u00a0When a player passes to a teammate that is ahead of them on the attack this is headmanning the puck. Hoser or Hose-head \u2013 A derogatory term.\u00a0 It is believed to have originated from the early days of hockey (before the invention of the Zamboni) when the losing team had to hose down the ice with water after the game. The House \u2013 \u201cThe House\u201d is the area from the goal posts to the face off dots to the tops of the circles, and is best defined with a picture (see illustration at right).\u00a0 Defensively, we talk about \u201cprotecting the house\u201d.\u00a0 This is because this is the area from which most goals are scored.\u00a0 Thus, we want to keep our opponents from having opportunities to shoot from inside the house. Interference:\u00a0A two minute minor penalty will be imposed on a player who interferes with or impedes the progress of an opponent who is not in possession of the puck, or who deliberately knocks a stick out of an opponent\u2019s hand or who prevents a player who has dropped his stick or any other piece of equipment from regaining possession of it. Lettuce\u00a0\u2013 A great head of hockey hair. \u00a0See also flow, salad. Long Change \u2013 In the second period, the goaltenders change ends, meaning that the players\u2019 bench is closer to the offensive zone rather than the defensive zone. The \u201clong change\u201d can be a factor when a tired line is stuck in the defensive zone and cannot come off due to the increased distance to the bench. Mitts \u2013 A player\u2019s hands or gloves.\u00a0 Gordie Howe was known to have large mitts (hands), and he was not afraid to \u201cdrop the mitts\u201d (fight). Odd Man Rush \u2013 When the number of offensive players heading into the attacking zone is greater than the number of defenders, such as a 3-on-2 or a 2-on-1. Offsides\u00a0\u2013\u00a0An offsides is called when a player precedes the puck into the offensive zone as indicated by the blue line. \u00a0When an offside occurs the referee stops play and the face off occurs outside the offensive zone. Olympic Sheet \u2013 An NHL rink is 85\u2032 x 200\u2032. An Olympic rink (or sheet) is 100\u2032 x 200\u2032. \u00a0International competitions are generally played on Olympic sheets. \u00a0This additional 15\u2032 of width can have a dramatic effect on opening up faster play. Pinch \u2013\u00a0A pinch is when a defenseman\u00a0either (a) attempts to hold the offensive blue line when the opponent has the puck and is attempting to clear their zone, or (b) leaves the blue line and pushes further into the offensive zone to play the puck. \u00a0In both cases, the defenseman is making a gamble that he is going to win the puck battle, and thus improve his team\u2019s chance of scoring. \u00a0The risk is that he loses, and the other team goes on the attack with an odd man rush. It is considered a risky play, which requires good judgment. \u00a0A defenseman\u00a0who loses a lot of pinches can expect to be scolded by his coach and/or teammates. Plumber \u2013 Similar to a Grinder.\u00a0 Not the most skilled player, but a hard worker who will battle in the corners and in front of the net. Plus/Minus \u2013\u00a0When a goal is scored for a player\u2019s team while the player is on the ice it is counted as +1. \u00a0If a goal is scored against a player\u2019s team while the player is one the ice it counted as -1. \u00a0The total for the player is known as plus/minus. \u00a0A\u00a0high positive plus/minus number would be indicative of a player who is helping his team. \u00a0The opposite is true for a player with a high negative plus/minus number. \u00a0So even if a player scores a lot of goals, if his plus/minus is high negative, this is an indication that the player is not helping out defensively. \u00a0Of course, there are other factors to be considered. \u00a0This is just an indicator. Point \u2013\u00a0The point is an area just inside the blue line of the attacking zone. It is normally occupied by the attacking team\u2019s defensive players. Sauce \u2013 Short for Saucer pass Sacuer Pass \u2013 A pass in which the puck is passed to another player such that it flies in the air like a flying saucer. This makes the pass very difficult to intercept by opposing players but it will still land flat on the ice making it simple to control for the receiving player. Salad\u00a0\u2013 Beautiful hockey hair. \u00a0See also flow, lettuce. Scoring Chance \u2013 A scoring chance is defined as a clear play directed toward the opposing net from a dangerous scoring area \u2013 loosely defined as the top of the circle in and inside the faceoff dots, though sometimes slightly more generous than that depending on the amount of immediately-preceding puck movement or screens in front of the net. Blocked shots are generally not included but missed shots are. A player is awarded a scoring chance anytime he is on the ice and someone from either team has a chance to score. He is awarded a \u201cchance for\u201d if someone on his team has a chance to score and a \u201cchance against\u201d if the opposing team has a chance to score. Sieve \u2013 A really awful goalie that has a lot of holes through which to score. Slot \u2013 A prime scoring area located between the faceoff circles and in front of the goal. Strong Side/Weak Side \u2013 The strong side is the side of the ice where the puck (and most of the players) are located.\u00a0 The weak side is the other side.\u00a0 We speak of moving the puck from the strong side to the weak side of the ice to get away from pressure.\u00a0 Once the puck goes to the other side (and players follow), then that becomes the strong side. Top Cheese/Top Cheddar \u2013 Used to describe a shot that scores in the top of the net, either off or just below the crossbar. Twig \u2013 A hockey stick (even though very few are made from wood anymore) Wave off \u2013\u00a0When a stoppage of play is about to occur, the referee may decide to continue play by \u201cwaving off\u201d the stoppage. \u00a0Examples include icing and offsides. Player Dashboard (requires login) Get Newsletter Login to this site requires ssl communication.Click here to reload the page over ssl. Username: Password: Remember me Lost your password? Enter your username or email: Back to login", "syngenetic permafrost | National Snow and Ice Data Center Skip to main content National Snow and Ice Data Center Home Data Data Sets for Research Brightness Temperature Glaciers Ice Sheets Permafrost Sea Ice Soil Moisture Snow ...search for more Scientific Data Search Support for Researchers Analysis & Imaging Tools Data Announcements Submit Your Data Data Policies User Support Data for Everyone Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Glacier Photograph Collection Greenland Ice Sheet Today MASIE (Daily sea ice extent) Satellite Observations of Arctic Change Sea Ice Index Virtual Globes: Google Earth Sponsored Programs Antarctic Glaciological Data Center Exchange for Local Observations and Knowledge of the Arctic (ELOKA) NOAA at NSIDC NASA Distributed Active Archive Center at NSIDC (NSIDC DAAC) Looking for facts and information? See About the Cryosphere. Research Scientists Research Grants Scientific Publications Informatics Research NSIDC Scientific Expeditions On Thin Ice: Expedition to a Crumbling Ice Shelf Scientists blog from Antarctica and provide a glimpse of what it's like to do research in the field. Read their blog ... News For the Media Newsroom: For the Media For Data Users Data Announcements The Drift Current Conditions Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Greenland Today Satellite Observations of Arctic Change NSIDC In the News Events NSIDC Monthly Highlights Icelights: Answers to your burning questions about ice and climate What's hot in the news around climate and sea ice and what are scientists talking about now? Read more... About About NSIDC NSIDC People Our Sponsors Jobs NSIDC Monthly Highlights Use & Copyright Contact Us Support NSIDC NSIDC's Green Data Center About the Cryosphere Quick Facts All About The Cryosphere All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Frozen Ground All About Sea Ice All About Arctic Climatology & Meteorology Snow, Ice and Climate Change Studying the Cryosphere Photo Gallery Educational Resources Cryosphere Glossary What is the Cryosphere? When scientists talk about the cryosphere, they mean the places on Earth where water is in its solid form, frozen into ice or snow. Read more ... Web pagesData Sets Cryosphere Glossary - Choose a Topic - climatology and meteorology freshwater ice frozen ground or permafrost glaciers icebergs and ice shelves ice sheets sea ice snow syngenetic permafrostpermafrost that formed through a rise of the permafrost table during the deposition of additional sediment or other earth material on the ground surface.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost Find Data Search NSIDC Data NASA Earthdata Search IceBridge Portal Data Collections List Stay Current Arctic Sea Ice News and Analysis Sea Ice Index (Passive microwave satellite data) MASIE (Daily sea ice extent, multi-source) Greenland Today Newsroom Learn About Snow and Ice Icelights: Answers to Your Questions Cryosphere Quick Facts All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Sea Ice Arctic Climatology - A Primer Get Help Knowledge Base Etc. Use & Copyright Web Policy Jobs Home | Contact Us\u00a9 2019, National Snow and Ice Data Center :: Advancing knowledge of Earth's frozen regions", "The Ultimate Ice Cream Glossary, A to Z - Eater clock menu more-arrow no yes Sweets Week The Ultimate Ice Cream Glossary, A to Z Gelato, frappe, sorbet \u2014 everything you need to know about cold treats by Daniela Galarza Oct 26, 2016, 1:00pm EDT Photography by Dina Avila Share Tweet Share Share The Ultimate Ice Cream Glossary, A to\u00a0Z tweet share Pocket Flipboard Email Despite our global economy, many regional ice cream styles have stayed stubbornly regional. No one outside of New England calls a milkshake a \"frappe.\" Ask someone outside of the San Francisco Bay Area what an Its-It is and they might look at you funny. In Massachusetts, \"Hoodsies,\" and their wooden spoons, were a classic summer treat. But what is ice cream, as its most basic?\u00a0American-style ice cream is a base of cream, milk, sugar, and often eggs that is cooked, cooled, and then churned in a frozen container until it partially freezes while air is incorporated, yielding a frozen but creamy treat. The ratio of dairy fat to sugar is crucial to the product\u2019s final texture. Flavorings like vanilla and chocolate are usually added before the ice cream base is churned. Philadelphia-style ice cream does not contain eggs and is usually sweeter. Milk ice is made without cream; French-style ice cream is always made with cream and eggs; Italian gelato is made with more milk than cream and does not always contain eggs. While ice cream novelties exist in every country in the world, this glossary is focused on American creations and international creations that have found a home in the U.S. (That American history, by the way, is centered firmly on our nation's second state: When I set forth to create a glossary of American ice cream, I didn't realize so much of it \u2014 Breyers, the Banana Split, Mister Softee, and water ice \u2014 originated in Pennsylvania.) Did we miss one of your favorite creations? Do tell us in the comments! Affogato al caffe: The origins are unclear, but it\u2019s a shot of espresso poured over a scoop of gelato. \"Affogato\" means \"drowned\" in Italian. A la mode: Translated from the French, it means \"in the style.\" The French might say, \"glace \u00e1 la mode de Anglais,\" which means ice cream served in the style of the English. But in the U.S., \u00e1 la mode means a dessert served with ice cream on top. It\u2019s often pie, but may also be cake, a brownie, or a cookie. Awful Awful: An ice cream drink popular in Rhode Island and currently sold by Newport Creamery, it\u2019s a blend of flavored syrup, milk, and a frozen-ice-milk blend. It is similar in texture to a frappe, aka a thick milkshake, also from the region. Balboa Bar: A square or rectangle of vanilla ice cream on a stick, dipped in chocolate and coated in salty or sweet toppings like crushed nuts and sprinkles. The Beach Bar is a local variation where the ice cream is dipped and rolled in toppings to order. Banana split: A classic American sundae consisting of a split banana, three scoops of ice cream, and several or all of the following: whipped cream or marshmallow cream, pineapple sauce, cherry sauce, fudge sauce, caramel sauce, peanuts, and at least one cherry. The dessert was invented in 1904 at a drugstore in Latrobe, Pennsylvania. Baskin-Robbins: The world's largest chain of ice cream shops was founded in 1945 by Burt Baskin and his brother-in-law Irv Robbins in Glendale, California. It is known for its 31 Flavors slogan. Today the chain operates over 7,600 shops in nearly 50 countries and is operated by Dunkin\u2019 brands. Ben & Jerry\u2019s: Childhood friends Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield founded their namesake ice cream company in 1978 in Burlington, Vermont. Known for its offbeat and occasionally political flavors, it is now owned and operated by Unilever \u2014 though Cohen and Greenfield still retain some creative control. Bomb/Bombe: Ice cream molded into a single-serving sized spherical or half spherical shape. Usually it is covered with a glaze and served as a plated dessert. Bomb Pop: An ice pop which looks roughly like a rocket on a stick. The classic flavor and color combination is cherry (red), lime (white), and blue raspberry (blue), with each flavor getting a third of the total pop. Bomb Pops were invented in 1955 by James S. Merritt and D.S. Abernethy in Kansas City, Missouri. Breyers: An ice cream brand founded in Philadelphia in 1866 by William A. Breyer, who first sold his ice cream out of his home, and later via horse and wagon on the streets. Unilever bought the business from Kraft Foods in 1993. Cabinet: A type of thick milkshake flavored with coffee popularized in Rhode Island. Candy, Chocolate, or Magic shell: A dip for ice cream cones. The base flavor is mixed with coconut oil or melted butter so that when it comes into contact with ice cream, it freezes or hardens instantly, forming a crunchy candy-like coating around the ice cream. Often it\u2019s made with chocolate, but also comes in strawberry and other flavors. Magic Shell is the brand name used by Smucker\u2019s. Carvel: An ice cream company founded by Tom Carvel on an ice cream truck in 1929, today, the company operates more than 400 franchise locations throughout the U.S. It\u2019s especially known for its ice cream cakes, which contain a layer of crunchies, or crisp cookie bits coated in candy shell. Carvel also sells soft serve ice cream, ice cream bars, and ice cream sandwiches. Choco Taco: An ice cream novelty shaped to look like a taco, with a round chocolate waffle-cone \"tortilla\" shell and fudge rippled ice cream filling. It was invented in Philadelphia in the 1980s, and usually topped with peanuts and coated in milk chocolate. Cold Stone Creamery: A brand founded in 1988 in Tempe, Arizona by Susan and Donald Sutherland, who wanted to create a type of ice cream that was \"neither hard-packed nor soft-serve.\" At Cold Stone, ice cream \"base flavors\" like cake batter, mint, and strawberry are scooped out onto a cold marble surface. Using paddles and scoops, staffers add mix-ins like gummy bears, brownies, fresh fruit, sprinkles, or pieces of cake, cookies, or candy. More than 1,500 locations are in operation in 27 countries. Concrete: First popularized in the 1950s, it\u2019s a type of milkshake \u2014 traditionally made using frozen custard instead of lower fat ice cream \u2014 so thick the server could hand it to the customer upside down and it would not drip out. Often mix-ins like slices of pie or candy are blended in. Cone: A cookie-like wafer shaped into a cone (sometimes the same dough or cookie is molded into a cup or another shape). Cones enable ice cream eaters to consume the treat out of hand and without a spoon. According to several sources, the first ice cream cone was created by Ernest Hamwi for the St. Louis World's Fair in 1904. Traditionally, it\u2019s made from a cookie dough or batter which is pressed into a round, waffle-patterned sheet that is then rolled into a cone while warm. Today, there are several different styles, including waffle cones, made from a batter; sugar cones, made from a sweet dough; and wafer cones, made from a starch mixture that is molded and baked into crispy but light cone shapes. Double cones have two openings at the top of the cone to allow for two scoops of ice cream to be placed side-by-side. (The single cone is also known as a \"poke\" in Northern Ireland and Scotland.) Creamsicle: Also called a 50-50 bar, it\u2019s a core of vanilla ice cream on a stick covered in a fruit-flavored ice. The most popular flavor is orange. The novelty is an evolution of the popsicle. See also: Fudgsicle. Cup: When it\u2019s not served in a cone, ice cream is served in a paper, stainless steel, glass, or ceramic cup. Dairy Queen: Founded in Joliet, Illinois in 1940, the franchised Dairy Queen (or DQ) chain is known for its soft-serve ice cream, Blizzards (a milkshake with candy or cookie mix-ins), and various flavors of magic or candy shells. The company operates more than 6,700 locations across the world, and has several different concepts, many of which serve savory fast food in addition to the ice cream treats. Dippin\u2019 Dots: A treat billed as the \"ice cream of the future\" when it was invented by Curt Jones, a Southern Illinois University Carbondale graduate, in 1987. The process involves flash freezing an ice cream base using liquid nitrogen. The process results in small pearls of ice cream that melt on the tongue. Because it must be stored at -40F, the product is not available commercially and is instead sold by franchisees. Drumstick: A sugar cone filled with vanilla ice cream, dipped in nuts and packaged in a wrapper \u2014 with many flavor variations \u2014 the ice cream drumstick was originally invented in 1928 by I.C. Parker of the Drumstick Company of Fort Worth, Texas. The brand name \"Drumstick\" is owned by Nestle. Drumsticks are now produced and sold by Nestle. Dreyer\u2019s: Often mistaken for Breyers, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream Holdings, Inc., was founded by Joseph Edy and William Dreyer in 1928 as Edy\u2019s Grand Ice Cream of Oakland, California. The partners split in 1947; in 1953, Dreyer renamed the company. Dreyer\u2019s uses a process called low-temperature extrusion, which produces a creamy ice cream but with less fat. Dreyer\u2019s parent company Nestle operates the two largest ice cream plants in the United States. Eskimo Pie: A vanilla ice cream bar covered in chocolate. It was invented in 1919 in Iowa but perfected by the Burt family of Youngstown, Ohio in 1920 when they added a handy stick to the bar. That allowed ice cream fans to eat it without getting a mess on their hands, and the creation was renamed a Good Humor Bar. The Klondike Bar is the brand name of the Eskimo pie. Falude: A Persian frozen dessert consisting of a sweet, often rose water-flavored syrup which is frozen and mixed with softened vermicelli noodles. Almonds or pistachios may also be added or used as toppings. The dessert is said to have originated long ago in the city of Shiraz. Float: The ice cream float \u2014 also known as a coke float, soda float, root beer float, or, in Australia and New Zealand, a \"spider\" \u2014 was invented by Robert McCay Green in Philadelphia, PA, in 1874. Some sources say he ran out of ice for his drinks and opted to use vanilla ice cream instead. According to Sundae Best: A History of Soda Fountains, Green was making cream sodas when he ran out of cream. He dashed to a nearby ice cream shop and filled his pitchers with ice cream, planning to use it in the drinks after it melted But with demand from customers rising he started making the drinks with scoops of frozen ice cream. Floats were popular at soda fountains and during Prohibition; they remain on menus at ice cream shops throughout the U.S. Frappe: In New England, the name of a very thick milkshake. It is pronounced \"frap,\" and rhymes with \"cap.\" In some places it is called a \"Velvet\". Free cone day: A popular promotion among ice cream shops, free cone day started at Ben & Jerry\u2019s in 1979, one year after the brand debuted; it has since been adopted by other ice cream purveyors, including H\u00e4agen-Dazs. Frozen banana: A whole, peeled banana impaled upon a stick lengthwise, frozen, and then dipped in chocolate. Often it is also sprinkled with salty toppings like peanuts. Like the Balboa Bar, it originated on Balboa island off the coast of Newport Beach in Southern California. It was made famous by the cult show Arrested Development. Frozen custard: This term is often used interchangeably with ice cream, but it refers to ice cream made with cream and eggs. Frozen yogurt: Also known as fro-yo, the frozen treat is usually lower in fat than traditional ice cream and has a tart flavor. It is made by freezing yogurt blended into an ice cream base with enough sugar to prevent it from turning icy. Frozen yogurt first gained popularity in the 1970s, though it was criticized as being too sour. Eventually companies like TCBY created formulas that were lighter and sweeter in flavor. Frozen yogurt fell out of favor in the early 2000s, but experienced a resurgence thanks to companies like Pinkberry and 16 Handles. Fudge pop/stick: Commonly known as a Fudgsicle, which is a registered trademark of Unilever, it is a chocolate pudding-based ice pop. See also: Fudgsicle, Creamsicle. Gelato: Italian-style ice cream, which is milk-based rather than cream-based, and is usually described as lighter in flavor but somewhat sweeter. Good Humor: One of the most prolific makers of ice cream novelties, the company created Good Humor Bars; by the 1960s it produced over 85 different variations. Today, the company owns the rights to and manufactures King Cones, ice cream sandwiches, dessert bars, Oreo-flavored novelties, among others. Good Humor Bar: An Eskimo Pie on a stick. Grape-Nuts: A breakfast cereal developed in 1897 made from wheat and barley. There are neither grapes nor nuts in it, though it does have a nutty flavor. In 1919, when a Canadian ice cream maker ran out of fruit, she decided to mix in some breakfast cereal. The deep, almost browned butter flavor of the cereal pairs very well with vanilla ice cream, and that combination, when mixed together, has become a popular flavor in New England, Jamaica, and parts of Canada. H\u00e4agen-Dazs: An ice cream brand created in 1961 by Reuben and Rose Mattus in NYC. Originally, the company only made vanilla, chocolate, and coffee-flavored ice cream. Today, it is licensed to Nestle in the USA and Canada, and is one of the few commercial brands to not use stabilizers or many additives. The company operates scoop shops throughout the U.S. and is widely distributed at grocery and convenience stores. Hoodsie: Since 1947 Massachusetts-based Hood, a dairy company, has made and distributed these small, pre-packaged cups of ice cream. One side of the cup is filled with vanilla ice cream while the other is filled with chocolate. For years the cups came with small wooden spoons but now only large packages for commercial sale contain the spoons. Ice cream cake: Ice cream shaped into a cake and frosted, or ice cream layered between layers of cake. Ice cream roll: A cake roll filled with ice cream and served sliced so as to show the internal spiral. The cake can be a sponge cake or chiffon, which are soft, airy, and flexible when cool. This phrase may also refer to Thai-style ice cream, which is made when ice cream base is poured onto a very cold surface, partially flash-frozen and then curled into rolls and served. Ice cream sandwich: Ice cream, sandwiched between two cookies. The traditional style is vanilla ice cream between two rectangular chocolate wafers. ICEE: A frozen, carbonated drink in soda or fruit juice flavors. Icee's founder, Omar Knedlik, is credited with invented the frozen drink machine in the late 1950s. (See also: Slurpee) Ice pop: The generic term for a popsicle, a juice, pudding, or sweetened water-based frozen treat on a stick. It can also refer to a water-based iced frozen snack packaged in a plastic sheath. Italian ice: Similar in texture to a slushie or Slurpee, it is partially frozen ice. It was popularized in the U.S. by Italian immigrants who were likely making a quick version of granita. It is also known as water ice, or sometimes, \"Philly water ice.\" It\u2019s It: An ice cream sandwich made from two soft oatmeal cookies and vanilla ice cream that is then dipped in chocolate. The treat hails from San Francisco, where it is said to have originated in SF theme part Playland-at-the-Beach in 1928. Jimmies: Chocolate-flavored sprinkles, aka the colorful bits of sugar used for decoration, the word's allegedly racist origins are a\u00a0matter of dispute. See also: sprinkles. Kakig\u014dri: Japanese dish of shaved ice topped with sauces, flavorings, fruit or sweetened condensed milk. The Nestle Drumstick. King Cone: A large drumstick manufactured by Good Humor. Nestle\u2019s competing product is the Drumstick, a smaller packaged ice cream cone. Kulfi: A popsicle popular in India made from a milk base which is flavored with nuts or spices. Milk ice: Popularized during the World Wars, it\u2019s ice cream made only with milk and sugar. The texture is icy due to the lack of fat in the milk. Milkshake: Ice cream blended with milk. Mister Softee: A franchised business of ice cream trucks that serve soft-serve ice cream, milkshakes, sundaes, dipped cones, and ice cream novelties. The Mister Softee brand was founded by the Conway family in 1956; on its first day in business, it charged\u00a0its customers in West Philadelphia just 10 cents per cone. Neapolitan: An ice cream flavor combination of chocolate, strawberry, and vanilla. It was popularized in the late 19th century by Neapolitan immigrants in the U.S. and today is commonly found in the grocery store aisle. Paddle: The partner to an ice cream scoop, it is usually an aluminum tool used to spread or curl ice cream. It can also be used to fold candy, nuts, or other flavorings into an ice cream base. Paletas: Fruit-flavored ice pops made with whole and blended fruit. Popular in Latin America and Latin American neighborhoods in the U.S. Pingsu/Pingsoo: A Korean dish of shaved ice topped with sauces, flavorings, fruit or sweetened condensed milk. Pinkberry: A franchised chain of frozen yogurt shops founded in 2005 and based in Scottsdale, Arizona. Popsicle: The brand name for an ice pop, trademarked by inventor Frank Epperson in 1923. Legally, \"Popsicle\" refers to only the ice pops made by the Unilever corporation. Semifreddo: Literally translated as \"semi-frozen,\" it is an Italian dessert made by freezing a mousse-like sweetened and flavored dairy mixture. Shave ice: Sometimes called\u00a0Hawaiian shave ice, it is made when a block of ice is shaved by a special ice shaver. This shaved ice is piled into a cup and then topped with flavored syrups. Sherbert/Sherbet: Fruit-flavored milk ice, no matter how it\u2019s spelled. Slurpee: A slushie made by 7-Eleven; the convenience store chain licensed the ICEE machine technology in 1965, and debuted its branded version of the slushie one year later. Slushie/Slush/Slushy: Named after snow of the same watery texture, it\u2019s like a snow cone but can be sipped through a straw. Snow cone: Similar to shave ice, it\u2019s made with a softer, more watery base atop which flavored syrups are dripped. The texture is softer because the product is served at a warmer temperature, so it is more water and less ice. Soft-serve: Ice cream with a lower fat content that is extruded out of a special machine which injects a certain amount of air into the churned mixture. That injection makes it softer and lighter than traditional ice cream. Sorbet: Sorbet or\u00a0sorbetto comes from the Arabic word\u00a0scharbat. It is a smooth, sweet, fruit-flavored frozen ice. Sprinkles: Colorful bits of candy or sugar used for decoration. Spumoni: Molded Italian ice cream with different layers, colors, flavors, and sometimes fruit bits, nuts, or syrups swirled in. It is related to the classic Neapolitan combination; layering ice cream flavors was common in Naples. Sundae: A combination of ice cream, sauce, and toppings or bases like sauce, brownie, cookies, cake, or fruit. Teaberry: Teaberries are the fruit of the wintergreen plant. Bright pink, they have a mild minty flavor, and because the plant grows wild in the Eastern U.S., it was used to flavor gum. It's also a commonly found ice cream flavor in Pennsylvania. Viennetta: A packaged and mass-produced ice cream cake, in the shape of a loaf, manufactured by Unilever that was popular in the 1990s. Its original flavor was a vanilla ice cream base with layers of chocolate. It is no longer available in the U.S., but is still available in Australia. Daniela Galarza is Eater's news editor. Dina Avila is a photographer based in Portland, Oregon. Sweets Week The Mysterious Origins of Tiramisu, the Dessert That Took the \u201880s by Storm Reports Take the Cannoli: One Pastry\u2019s Rise From Sicilian Treat to Iconic Dessert Reports Everything You Need to Know About Classic American Ice Cream Chorus Terms of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Policy GDPR Commitment Communications Preferences Contact Send Us a Tip Community Guidelines Masthead Ethics Statement Newsletters How to Pitch All Systems Operational Check out our status page for more details. Vox Media Advertise with us Jobs @ Vox Media \u00a9 2019 Vox Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved tweet share", "Data: Terminology | National Snow and Ice Data Center Skip to main content National Snow and Ice Data Center Home Data Data Sets for Research Brightness Temperature Glaciers Ice Sheets Permafrost Sea Ice Soil Moisture Snow ...search for more Scientific Data Search Support for Researchers Analysis & Imaging Tools Data Announcements Submit Your Data Data Policies User Support Data for Everyone Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Glacier Photograph Collection Greenland Ice Sheet Today MASIE (Daily sea ice extent) Satellite Observations of Arctic Change Sea Ice Index Virtual Globes: Google Earth Sponsored Programs Antarctic Glaciological Data Center Exchange for Local Observations and Knowledge of the Arctic (ELOKA) NOAA at NSIDC NASA Distributed Active Archive Center at NSIDC (NSIDC DAAC) Looking for facts and information? See About the Cryosphere. Research Scientists Research Grants Scientific Publications Informatics Research NSIDC Scientific Expeditions On Thin Ice: Expedition to a Crumbling Ice Shelf Scientists blog from Antarctica and provide a glimpse of what it's like to do research in the field. Read their blog ... News For the Media Newsroom: For the Media For Data Users Data Announcements The Drift Current Conditions Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Greenland Today Satellite Observations of Arctic Change NSIDC In the News Events NSIDC Monthly Highlights Icelights: Answers to your burning questions about ice and climate What's hot in the news around climate and sea ice and what are scientists talking about now? Read more... About About NSIDC NSIDC People Our Sponsors Jobs NSIDC Monthly Highlights Use & Copyright Contact Us Support NSIDC NSIDC's Green Data Center About the Cryosphere Quick Facts All About The Cryosphere All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Frozen Ground All About Sea Ice All About Arctic Climatology & Meteorology Snow, Ice and Climate Change Studying the Cryosphere Photo Gallery Educational Resources Cryosphere Glossary What is the Cryosphere? When scientists talk about the cryosphere, they mean the places on Earth where water is in its solid form, frozen into ice or snow. Read more ... Web pagesData Sets All About Sea Ice Introduction CharacteristicsIce formation Salinity and Brine Multiyear Ice Features Arctic vs. Antarctic ProcessesThermodynamics Dynamics EnvironmentGlobal Climate Trends Indigenous People Operations Wildlife ExplorationArctic Antarctic DataTerminology Samples StudyingField Studies Remote Sensing Modeling References and Links How to Cite Data: Terminology Sea ice is described by the area it covers, its thickness, its age, and its movement with the winds and ocean currents. The Sea Ice Index data products that NSIDC distributes provide information about several sea ice characteristics. Here, we define several key characteristics that are of interest to scientists studying sea ice. When scientists study sea ice using remote sensing data, they typically describe data in terms of gridded fields. This means the data are provided in pixels, or discrete cells, of a certain shape and size. Most of NSIDC's gridded sea ice data consist of fields of square cells that are 25.0 kilometers (15.5 miles) on a side, or covering an area of 625.0 square kilometers each (241.3 square miles). Scientists can calculate different quantities from these gridded fields. Area When we use this term, we mean the region covered by sea ice, typically given in square kilometers. For a grid cell, it is the area of the portion of the cell covered by ice. For an entire hemisphere, it is the total area covered by ice, which corresponds to sum of the area of each cell multiplied by the fractional concentration for that cell. Concentration Concentration is a unitless term that describes the relative amount of area covered by ice, compared to some reference area. Thus, concentration describes how much of a 25.0 kilometer by 25.0 kilometer (15.5 mile by 15.5 mile) box is covered by sea ice. Ice concentration typically is reported as a percentage (0 to 100 percent ice), a fraction from 0 to 1, or sometimes in tenths (0/10 to 10/10). Our Sea Ice Index products show ice concentration as a percentage. A value of 0 means there is no ice, while a value of 100 means the region is completely covered by ice. Extent Extent defines a region as either \"ice-covered\" or \"not ice-covered.\" For each data cell, it is a binary term; either the cell has ice (usually a value of \"1\") or the cell has no ice (usually a value of \"0\"). A threshold determines this labeling. A typical threshold is 15 percent, meaning that if the data cell has greater than 15 percent ice concentration, the cell is labeled as \"ice-covered.\" The Sea Ice Index products have a threshold of 15 percent. A threshold can also be as high as 30 percent. Extent is sometimes described in terms of area (in square kilometers) covered by at least some ice (above the threshold). Extent is different from the total area in that if a given region has a percentage of ice concentration greater than the threshold, the entire region is considered \"ice-covered.\" Total area tells how much of the region is actually covered by ice. Arctic- or antarctic-wide sea ice extent is always a larger number than area. Anomaly Anomaly data fields measure the difference between the sea ice value (area, extent, or concentration) at a given time and the long-term average. So an anomaly tells us how close to average the area, extent, or concentration are in a given month. Anomalies have positive values where there is more ice than average and negative values where there is less ice than average. Area and extent anomalies are reported in square kilometers, and concentration anomalies are given in percentages (-100 to +100 percent, or a fraction, -1 to +1.) The anomaly fields have the same units as their corresponding fields. For example, area and extent anomalies are in units of square kilometers, and concentration anomalies are in percents (-100 to +100) or fractions (-1 to +1). The time period for the long-term average used in the Sea Ice Index is 1981 to 2010. Thirty years is considered a standard baseline period for weather and climate, and the satellite record is now long enough to provide a thirty year baseline period. Comparisons Among Area, Concentration, and Extent The diagram and table below illustrate the definitions of area, concentration, and extent. For easier representation, each square grid cell is 8.0 kilometers (5.0 miles) on a side, for a total of 64.0 square kilometers (24.7 square miles). In A, there is no ice. In B, one fourth of the cell is covered by ice. In C, one half is covered by ice, and in D, the entire cell is covered by ice. To simplify calculations, a hypothetical threshold of 30 percent for sea ice extent is used in this example. This means that areas with less than 30 percent sea ice coverage are considered \"ice-free,\" and areas with more than 30 percent sea ice coverage are considered \"ice-covered.\" It is important to emphasize that this example is hypothetical, and in practice, thresholds are typically somewhat lower, ranging from 15 to 20 percent. Sea ice property for a 8 km2 (3 mi2) cell A B C D Ice-Covered Area 0 km2 16.0 km2 (6.2 mi2) 32.0 km2 (12.4 mi2) 64.0 km2 (24.7 mi2) Concentration (%) 0% 25% 50% 100% Concentration (fraction) 0 0.25 0.5 1.0 ExtentNo units, 30% concentration threshold 0 0 1 1 Extent30% concentration threshold 0 km2 0 km2 64.0 km2 (24.7 mi2) 64.0 km2 (24.7 mi2) Area anomaly (%)Average area is 48 km2 (18.5 mi2) -48.0 km2 (-18.5 mi2) -32.0 km2 (-12.4 mi2) -16.0 km2 (-6.2 mi2) +16.0 km2 (6.2 mi2) Concentration anomaly (%)Average concentration is 48 km2/64 km2 = 75% -75% -50% -25 % +25 % For example, one-fourth of cell B is covered by ice, so the ice-covered area is 16 square kilometers and the ice concentration is 25 percent or 0.25. The concentration value is less than the extent threshold, so the cell is designated \"not ice-covered\" with an extent value of \"0.\" The area is 32 square kilometers below average, so the area shows a negative anomaly (16 - 48 = -32 square kilometers). The concentration also shows a negative anomaly (25 - 75 = -50 percent). Learn About NSIDC Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis: Read scientific analysis on Arctic sea ice conditions. We provide an update during the first week of each month, or more frequently as conditions warrant. Icelights: Get answers to your burning questions about ice and climate. NSIDC News Science at NSIDC See Also NASA Earth Observatory Reference: Global Warming Quick Facts about Sea Ice Frequently Asked Questions about Arctic Sea Ice State of the Cryosphere: Sea Ice Find Data Search NSIDC Data NASA Earthdata Search IceBridge Portal Data Collections List Stay Current Arctic Sea Ice News and Analysis Sea Ice Index (Passive microwave satellite data) MASIE (Daily sea ice extent, multi-source) Greenland Today Newsroom Learn About Snow and Ice Icelights: Answers to Your Questions Cryosphere Quick Facts All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Sea Ice Arctic Climatology - A Primer Get Help Knowledge Base Etc. Use & Copyright Web Policy Jobs Home | Contact Us\u00a9 2019, National Snow and Ice Data Center :: Advancing knowledge of Earth's frozen regions", "(PDF) Study of the Ice-rich Syngenetic Permafrost for Road Design (Interior Alaska) | Mikhail Kanevskiy, B. Connor, and J. O'Donnell - Academia.edu Skip to main content Log InSign UpLog InSign Upmore\u00a0Job BoardAboutPressBlogPeoplePapersTermsPrivacyCopyright\u00a0We're Hiring!\u00a0Help Centerless pdfStudy of the Ice-rich Syngenetic Permafrost for Road Design (Interior Alaska)2012Mikhail KanevskiyY. ShurB. ConnorM. DillonE. StephaniJ. O'DonnellJonathan OdonnellMikhail KanevskiyY. ShurB. ConnorM. DillonE. StephaniJ. O'DonnellJonathan OdonnellDownload with GoogleDownload with Facebookor download with emailStudy of the Ice-rich Syngenetic Permafrost for Road Design (Interior Alaska)DownloadStudy of the Ice-rich Syngenetic Permafrost for Road Design (Interior Alaska)Mikhail KanevskiyY. ShurB. ConnorM. DillonE. StephaniJ. O'DonnellJonathan OdonnellMikhail KanevskiyY. ShurB. ConnorM. DillonE. StephaniJ. O'DonnellJonathan OdonnellLoading PreviewSorry, preview is currently unavailable. You can download the paper by clicking the button above.READ PAPERDownload pdf \u00d7CloseLog InLog In\u00a0with\u00a0FacebookLog In\u00a0with\u00a0GoogleorEmail:Password:Remember me on this computeror\u00a0reset passwordEnter the email address you signed up with and we'll email you a reset link. Need an account?\u00a0Click here to sign up AboutBlogPeoplePapersJob BoardAdvertise\u00a0We're Hiring!\u00a0Help CenterFind new research papers in:PhysicsChemistryBiologyHealth SciencesEcologyEarth SciencesCognitive ScienceMathematicsComputer ScienceTermsPrivacyCopyrightAcademia \u00a92019", "Permafrost Tunnel Research Facility Skip to main content (Press Enter). US Army Corps of Engineers Engineer Research and Development Center \u00ae About Director's Welcome Mission and Vision ERDC Capabilities Ongoing Research Products and Services Equipment and Facilities ERDC Fact Sheet Values\u2013The ERDC Way Leadership ERDC People in the News Client Testimonials Awards History The Engineers at Vicksburg Business With Us Contracting Small Business Technology Transfer Success Stories Patents Available for Licensing Partnering Mechanisms Cooperative Research and Development Agreements Patent License Agreements Intergovernmental Cooperative Agreements Testing Services Agreements Technical Assistance Agreements Educational Partnering Agreements International Research Office Missions Geospatial Research and Engineering Military Engineering Deployable Force Protection Demo Senior Cooperation Forum Environmental Quality and Installations Arctic \u2013 ERDC Facilitates DOD Gateway Water Resources Engineered Resilient Systems Locations CERL CHL CRREL Engineering Resources Branch EL GRL GSL ITL USACE Locations Careers Media News Stories News Releases Fact Sheets Videos Images Seminars Library Contact USACE Office Locator Home / CRREL / Permafrost Tunnel Research Facility / General Facts Installations of the Future Industry Day\u00a0 > Deadline Extended >\u00a0click for details March\u00a022, 4 p.m. Celebrating 20 years of Discovering, Developing and Delivering Menu Home Tunnel Overview Description Location Virtual Tunnel Tour Video - B-roll Tunnel Geology Soil and Rock Paleontology Permafrost General Facts Cryostructures Massive Ice Patterned Ground Climate Change Tunnel Engineering Excavation Methods Keeping the Tunnel Frozen Research Bibliography Ongoing Research Permafrost: General Facts Permafrost (n)\u2014The technical definition is soil and/or rock that has remained below 32\u00b0F for more than two years, regardless if significant amounts of ice exist or not. Collapse All\u00a0Expand All Permafrost Zones Continuous permafrost is found in very high latitude regions, where permafrost exists uninterrupted both vertically and horizontally with a few exceptions like under bodies of water. In Alaska, continuous permafrost begins generally at the latitude of the Brooks Range. Moving south from the continuous permafrost zone towards latitudes with no permafrost, there is the region of discontinuous permafrost. Discontinuous permafrost is where permafrost only exists in certain areas depending on the vegetation, soil type, moisture, and exposure to solar radiation. The percentage of permafrost coverage varies from 90% to sporadic or isolated patches. Fairbanks, Alaska, and the Permafrost Tunnel are in the discontinuous permafrost zone. Mountain or alpine permafrost exists at high altitudes in low latitude regions, where the cold mountain air temperatures can support permafrost in a region that does not have permafrost at low altitudes. Subsea permafrost exists on the continental shelves in the arctic seas. This permafrost was formed when the sea-levels were lower during large glaciations. Due to the concentration of salt in the water, which lowers the freezing point to approximately 28\u00b0F, the now higher sea levels do not thaw the permafrost. Diagram by P\u00e9w\u00e9, T.L. (1982) Geologic hazards of the Fairbanks area: Alaska Division of Geological &l Geophysical Surveys Special Report 15, 119 p. (Public Domain) Temperature Profile The diagram illustrates a simplified ground temperature profile of permafrost. As the air temperature oscillates between cold and warm, the ground temperature will reflect these temperature changes to a certain depth and with a lag in time. The minimum and maximum temperature the soil obtains forms a trumpet curve that intersects at the depth of zero amplitude, where annual temperature variations cease. The geothermal gradient is the warming that comes from the center of the earth, which is approximately 1.5\u00b0F per 100 ft. The geothermal gradient defines the curve's slope in between the depth of zero amplitude and the bottom of the permafrost. Overlying the top of permafrost, or permafrost table, is the active layer. This top portion of ground thaws during the summer and refreezes during the winter. For non-permafrost areas, the active layer is the top portion of ground that freezes during the winter and re-thaws during the summer, it is also known as the seasonal frost layer. On the diagram, the depth of the active layer is where the maximum temperature intersects the vertical 32\u00b0lF line, meaning that is the depth where the permafrost thaws to during the summer. For Fairbanks, Alaska, the typical active layer depth is 2.5 feet and the typical permafrost thickness is 150 feet, however both vary depending on the local conditions. The average permafrost temperature is about 31\u00b0F, and this is sometimes termed \"warm permafrost\" because it is very close to the thawing point. The profile diagram is simplified and exaggerated to show detail. Due to fluctuating climates, or a body of surface water, the permafrost could have an unfrozen layer or talik in between the active layer and the top of the permafrost. During a climate change event, the curve between the depth of the zero amplitude and the bottom of the permafrost could be in non-equilibrium and curved for a period of time until equilibrium readjusts by thawing or freezing of the top or bottom of the permafrost. Epigenetic Versus Syngenetic Permafrost Epigenetic permafrost is formed in soils already has been deposited by wind, water, and/or gravity through the thousands of years of geological action, and after are subjected to a colder climate causes freezing and creates permafrost. Syngenetic permafrost is the process where soil freezes and becomes permafrost occurs as the soils are being emplaced by wind, water, and/or gravity. The segregate ice and other ice features that are created at the base of the active layer can become captured and will then exist through out of the depth of the syngenetic permafrost layer. With epigenetic permafrost, the ice features will be concentrated at the top portion of the soil layer. Ice wedges, in epigenetic permafrost, will have a typical wedge shape as seen in the diagram. In syngenetic permafrost, ice wedges will have an atypical shape. With syngenetic permafrost, if the deposition is continual and without large climate change events, the ice wedge will elongate as the top of ground surface and permafrost rises. If the deposition varies with pace and/or the climate changes for a period of time, the ice wedges will look truncated and stacked, and is termed multi-stage wedges in the diagram. For example, imagine an ice wedge developing during a cold, steady depositional period, and then a climate change event happens where the ice stops growing due to warming. This event will truncate the ice wedge, and when conditions returns to cold another ice wedge will start to develop. The diagrams are exaggerated and simplified, where actual ice wedges will not look perfectly shaped as cracking does not happen in the center of the wedge every time. The tunnel primarily contains syngenetic ice wedges, where for several the type is unknown. Several ice wedges are multi-stage looking ice wedges. However, the ice wedges are truncated by a thermal erosion event that took out the tops of the ice wedges, or possibly the centers of a large continual deposition ice wedges. The top portions of the ice wedges cannot be seen within the tunnel, so it is unknown which type of syngenetic ice wedge it is. The Permafrost Tunnel contains syngenetic permafrost. Due to the syngenetic nature of the permafrost makes the tunnel a time capsule throughout the last 40,000 years. The deposition of the soils through wind and water action was very slow, and through out this time flora and fauna existed on the ground surface. Eventually the flora and fauna were buried and incorporated within the permafrost where it has been kept frozen ever since. There are many exposures of bones and plants along with ice features in the tunnel that can tell us a lot about the past climate and its changes through the last 40,000 years. Frost ActionsVirtually all of the features within permafrost are due to frost actions. As an example, segregated ice forms as the freezing front moves downward through the soil and draws water to it. The ground can become so cold causing it to contract so much that the ground will crack to relieve stress, this eventually leads to the formation ice wedges. Seasonal freezing and thawing will also create a variety of patterned ground. After the soil is completely frozen, there are very few natural processes that will continue to create features. The freezing and thawing process generally must occur to mold or shape the soil or terrain. Permafrost Thaw-Stability Coarse-grained soils, such as gravels, are non-frost-susceptible, meaning they do not form significant segregated ice and frost heave. This also means that permafrost coarse-grained soils generally do not have high percentage of ice. Because of the lack of segregated ice formation, the individual soil grains will generally remain intact with one another after the freezing process. When these soils thaw, the soil grains will have little or no distance to travel until they are in contact with each other. Therefore, the soil will have minimal settlement and keep their foundation strength. Fine-grained soils, such as silt and clays, are frost-susceptible, and meaning they form segregated ice, if water is present, and frost heave. The soil frost heaves because the forming ice lens pushes the soil grains relatively far apart, the amount of frost heave is generally dependent on the amount of water that is available. When these soils thaw, the soil grains must travel large distances to become in contact with each other again. Therefore, the soil will have large thaw settlements that are often not uniform throughout an area. In addition, the thawing soils will release the previously frozen excess water which will saturate the soil forcing it loss much of its foundation strength. However, if the fine-grained soils had no access to water when freezing, the permafrost formation will be dry and when thawed will generally have minimal settlement. References for This Page References Davis, Neil (2001) Permafrost: a guide to frozen ground in transition. Fairbanks, AK: University of Alaska Press. Kanevskiy, Mikhail, Daniel Fortier, Yuri Shur, Matthew Bray, and Torre Jorgenson (2008) Detailed cryostratigraphic studies of syngenetic permafrost in the winze of the CRREL permafrost tunnel, Fox, Alaska. In Vol. 1 of Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Permafrost: University of Alaska Fairbanks, June 29\u2013July 3, 2008, ed. D.L. Kane and K.M. Hinkel, 889\u2013894. Fairbanks, AK: Institute of Northern Engineering. P\u00e9w\u00e9, T.L. (1982) Geologic hazards of the Fairbanks area: Alaska Division of Geological & Geophysical Surveys Special Report 15, 119 p. van Everdingen, Robert, ed. 1998 revised May 2005. Multi-language glossary of permafrost and related ground-ice terms. Boulder, CO: National Snow and Ice Data Center/World Data Center for Glaciology. ESSAYONS Our Mission The mission of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is to deliver vital public and military engineering services; partnering in peace and war to strengthen our nation\u2019s security, energize the economy and reduce risks from disasters. About the Engineer Research and Development Center The official public website of the U.S. Army Engineer Research and Development Center (ERDC) AccessibilityContact UsFOIAInformation Quality ActLink DisclaimerNo Fear ActPrivacy & SecurityPublic InquiriesSite MapUSA.gov SHARPiSALUTE", "Ice wedge - Wikipedia Ice wedge From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia \u00a0\u00a0(Redirected from Frost wedge) Jump to navigation Jump to search Ice wedges in Sprengisandur, Iceland A melting pingo with surrounding ice wedge polygons near Tuktoyaktuk, Canada Ice wedge exposed by erosion along the Beaufort Sea coast, Canada. The wedge formed by thermal contraction of the ground which opened a crack in winter. The crack filled with meltwater in the spring which then froze in the permafrost, causing the thin vertical lines of ice and sediment that form the wedge itself. An ice wedge is a crack in the ground formed by a narrow or thin piece of ice that measures up to 3\u20134 meters in length at ground level and extends downwards into the ground up to several meters. During the winter months, the water in the ground freezes and expands. Once temperatures reach \u221217 degrees Celsius or lower,[citation needed] the ice that has already formed acts like a solid and expands to form cracks in the surface known as ice wedges. As this process continues over many years ice wedges can grow, up to the size of a swimming pool.[citation needed] Ice wedges usually appear in a polygonal pattern known as ice wedge polygons. The cracks can also be filled with materials other than ice, especially sand, and then they're called sand wedges. Contents 1 Formation 1.1 Thermal contraction theory 2 Forms 2.1 Active 2.2 Inactive 2.3 Casts 3 Types 3.1 Epigenetic 3.2 Syngenetic 3.3 Anti-Syngenetic 4 References Formation[edit] There are many theories that attempt to explain the origin of ice wedges but only one has been consistently supported by most prominent scientists: the thermal contraction theory. Thermal contraction theory[edit] The thermal contraction theory states that during the winter months, thermal contraction cracks form only a few cm wide and a couple of metres deep because of the extreme cold weather.[1] Over the next few months, the snow melts and the remaining water fills the cracks and the permafrost below the surface freezes it. These tiny cracks turn into permafrost. Once the summer months arrive, the permafrost expands; horizontal compression produces upturning of the frozen sediment by plastic deformation. The next winter the cold refreezes and cracks the already forming ice wedge, opening a way for the melting snow of spring to fill the empty crack. The mean annual air temperature thought needed to form ice wedges is \u22126\u00b0 to \u22128\u00b0C or colder.[2] Forms[edit] There are three different forms of ice wedges: active, inactive and casts. All three forms are prevalent today and can be found in different parts of the world. Active[edit] Active ice wedges are those that are still evolving and growing. During each year, a layer of ice will be added if cracking occurs, but cracking need not occur every year to be considered active. The area in which most ice wedges remain active is along the permafrost zone. The number of active ice wedges that are cracking yearly is consistently declining as they become inactive.[3] Inactive[edit] Inactive ice wedges are wedges that are no longer cracking and growing. Throughout the winter months, the wedge does not split and therefore in the summer no new water is added.[3] Casts[edit] In areas of past permafrost, ice wedges have melted and are no longer filled with ice. The wedge, which is now empty, is filled with sediment and dirt from the surrounding walls. These are called ice wedge casts and are used to estimate the climate of hundreds of thousands of years ago. Types[edit] Ice wedges have historically been classified into two main categories: epigenetic and syngenetic[4]. The type of an ice wedges refer to the way in which the wedge grows over time. Relatively recent field studies have revealed a new type of ice wedge: anti-syngenetic. Currently, these are the only three distinctly classified types of ice wedges observed in nature[5]. The differences among the growth patterns of epigenetic, syngenetic and anti-syngenetic wedges then depend upon ground surface conditions, i.e. whether the ground level remains essentially unchanged or whether there is addition or loss of material[4]. Epigenetic[edit] \u2018Epigenetic\u2019 in geological terms refers to geological features that formed after the formation of the surrounding materials. In relation to ice wedges, this means that epigenetic ice wedges are found to form in preexisting permafrost, and are not formed at the same time as the permafrost meaning they are much younger than the surrounding material. An ice wedge being epigenetic also refers to the fashion in which they grow. These types of ice wedges grow considerably wider over their lifetime, but rarely any deeper or taller. This means that epigenetic ice wedges can grow to at most 3-5 meters in width, but stay roughly the same depth/height as when they had formed[6]. Typically, the sediments on either side of an epigenetic ice wedge, adjacent to the edges of the wedge exhibit upward bending. In an epigenetic ice wedge, the age of the ice on the periphery changes little from top to bottom. Syngenetic[edit] Syngenetic ice wedges, like the epigenetic variety, find their roots in the geological term syngenetic, which means forming at the same time as the surrounding material[6]. This is because syngenetic ice wedges grow as the upper permafrost surface rises in response to the addition of material on the ground surface[4]. This allows syngenetic ice wedges to grow very deep, as the surface around them rises with the accumulation of alluvium (in floodplains), peat (in tundra), and gelifluction deposits (at the bottom of a slope), among other materials[4]. Syngenetic ice wedges may only form if the thermal contraction and subsequent ice-veinlet growth can keep pace with the addition of new material. If this is the case, the ice wedge can reach depths of 25 meters, but the average is much less[6]. In a syngenetic ice wedge, the age of the ice on the periphery decreases upwards. Anti-Syngenetic[edit] Anti-syngenetic ice wedge were first observed in 1990 during the fieldwork of J. Ross Mackay. Mackay found that anti-syngenetic grew in conditions opposite to those of syngenetic ice wedges in that the anti-syngenetic variety required the removal of material instead of the accumulation and addition of material[4]. Anti-syngenetic ice wedges only form on slopes, where there is a net loss of materials erosion. Similar to syngenetic ice wedges, anti-syngenetic ice wedges can only occur if the rate of thermal contraction cracking and ice-veinlet growth keeps pace with the removal of active material[4]. Anti-syngenetic ice wedges therefore only grow downwards, penetrating deeper into the soil only as the upper layers are removed by mass wasting and erosion[4]. In an anti-syngenetic ice wedge, the age of the ice on the periphery increases upwards. References[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ice wedges. ^ \"Ice wedges, polygons and pingos\". Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service - Alaska. 2006-02-14. Archived from the original on 2008-05-18. Retrieved 2008-05-26. ^ \"Permafrost: Origins\". Britannica Online Encyclopedia. Retrieved 2008-05-26. ^ a b \"Permafrost: Active wedges, inactive wedges, and ice-wedge casts\". Britannica Online Encyclopedia. Retrieved 2008-05-26. ^ a b c d e f g Mackay, J. Ross (1990). \"Some observations on the growth and deformation of epigenetic, syngenetic and anti-syngenetic ice wedges\". Permafrost and Periglacoal Processes. 1: 15\u201329 \u2013 via Wiley. ^ Hariprasad C. (2011) Epigenetic Ice. In: Singh V.P., Singh P., Haritashya U.K. (eds) Encyclopedia of Snow, Ice and Glaciers. Encyclopedia of Earth Sciences Series. Springer, Dordrecht ^ a b c Subcommittee, P., 1988. Glossary of permafrost and related ground-ice terms. Associate Committee on Geotechnical Research, National Research Council of Canada, Ottawa, 156. vtePeriglacial environmentLandforms Blockfield Bratschen Cryoplanation terrace Glacial erratic Paha Palsa Periglacial lake Pingo Protalus rampart Rock glacier Strandflat Glaciokarst Thermokarst Patterned ground Frost boil Polygons Solifluction lobes and sheets Sorted stripe Stone ring Processes Cryoplanation Cryosuction Cryoturbation Fluvio-thermal erosion Frost heave Frost weathering Gelifluction Ice segregation Methane release Nivation Solifluction Syngenetic permafrost growth Zero-curtain effect Soils and deposits Active layer Gelisols Ice wedge Loess Peat Permafrost Stratified slope deposit Talik Yedoma Biomes and ecotones Arctic tundra Arctic tree line Antarctic oasis Antarctic tundra Montane grasslands and shrublands Alpine tundra Alpine tree line (Massenerhebung effect) Taiga (Drunken trees) Climate Alpine Polar Subpolar Category:Periglacial landforms Template:Glaciers Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ice_wedge&oldid=865143178\" Categories: Periglacial landformsPatterned groundsPermafrostHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2012Articles with unsourced statements from May 2008Commons category link is on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces ArticleTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages DeutschEspa\u00f1olFran\u00e7aisItalianoNederlandsNorskPolskiSvenska Edit links This page was last edited on 22 October 2018, at 01:20\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "An Error Occurred Setting Your User Cookie An Error Occurred Setting Your User Cookie This site uses cookies to improve performance. If your browser does not accept cookies, you cannot view this site. Setting Your Browser to Accept Cookies There are many reasons why a cookie could not be set correctly. Below are the most common reasons: You have cookies disabled in your browser. You need to reset your browser to accept cookies or to ask you if you want to accept cookies. Your browser asks you whether you want to accept cookies and you declined. To accept cookies from this site, use the Back button and accept the cookie. Your browser does not support cookies. Try a different browser if you suspect this. The date on your computer is in the past. If your computer's clock shows a date before 1 Jan 1970, the browser will automatically forget the cookie. To fix this, set the correct time and date on your computer. You have installed an application that monitors or blocks cookies from being set. You must disable the application while logging in or check with your system administrator. Why Does this Site Require Cookies? This site uses cookies to improve performance by remembering that you are logged in when you go from page to page. To provide access without cookies would require the site to create a new session for every page you visit, which slows the system down to an unacceptable level. What Gets Stored in a Cookie? This site stores nothing other than an automatically generated session ID in the cookie; no other information is captured. In general, only the information that you provide, or the choices you make while visiting a web site, can be stored in a cookie. For example, the site cannot determine your email name unless you choose to type it. Allowing a website to create a cookie does not give that or any other site access to the rest of your computer, and only the site that created the cookie can read it.", "List of ice hockey terminology | Ice Hockey Wiki | FANDOM powered by Wikia FANDOM Games Movies TV Video Wikis Explore Wikis Community Central Start a Wiki Search Sign In Don't have an account? Register Start a Wiki Advertisement Ice Hockey Wiki 61,254 Pages Add new page Top Content most_popular Most visited Seventh Player Award List of NHL records (team) List of Ice Hockey Players of Asian Descent List of OHA Junior C Seasons List of ice hockey terminology List of NHL players with 1000 points List of NHL players with 100-point seasons highest_ratings Newly changed Manitoba Senior AAA Saskatchewan Prairie Senior Hockey League North Central Hockey League (Alberta) 2019 Allan Cup 2018-19 Atlantic Hockey Season Vaudreuil Titans 2018-19 OSAHL Season Community Featured users HockeyAl Dtalbot MarchandTriedToLickMe Kyvuh Community portal Forum Recent blog posts Explore Wiki Activity Random page Community Videos Images in: Terminology List of ice hockey terminology View source History Talk (0) Share This is a list of common terminology and slang used in ice hockey along with explanations of their meanings. For other terms and an understanding of ice hockey, refer to ice hockey. Contents: 0\u20139 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Top\u00a0of\u00a0Page \u2014 See\u00a0also 0-9 2-man advantage\u00a0 See five on three. 2-on-1\u00a0 See odd man rush 3-on-2\u00a0 See odd man rush. 500\u00a0 (also known as .500) 50% or even, usually referring to a team's overall record when their number of wins equals their number of regulation losses. 5-on-3\u00a0 See five on three. 5-on-5\u00a0 See full strength. A Attacking zone\u00a0 The opposing team's end of the ice, as determined by the blue line. Apple\u00a0 Another term for assist. B Backhander or Backhand shot A shot that is taken from the backside of the blade. Backchecking Rushing back to the defensive zone in response to an opposing team's attack. Backdoor The unprotected side of the goal when the goaltender is protecting one side. Backstop A goaltender. Bar down A shot that hits the crossbar and then proceeds down into the net for a goal. Bender A person who is bad at skating or hockey in general, thus resulting in the bending of ankles. Bird cage The cage on the helmet. Biscuit The puck. Biscuit in the basket Scoring a goal. Blocker The rectangular pad that a goaltender wears on the stick-holding hand. (See waffle pad.) Blowing a tire When a player that is skating falls down for no apparent reason. Blue line The lines separating the attack/defense zones from the neutral zone. Blueliner A defenseman. Boarding Checking a player from behind into the boards. Body checking Using the hip or body to knock an opponent against the boards or to the ice (also known as hip checking). Boobirds Obnoxious fans who boo the home team or a player when they are playing poorly, or they boo an ex-player who returns to the rink. Bottle Rocket The event in which a goal is scored and the goaltender's water bottle, which is placed on top of the net during play, is propelled into the air by the puck striking it from underneath. When this happens, the shot is almost always from a very steep angle, close to the net. The box see Penalty box Breakaway When a player has possession of the puck and there are no defenders other than the goalie between him and the opposing goal. Butterfly A style of goaltending wherein the goalie tends to cover the lower half of the net with his or her leg pads. Breezers your mom. Bucket A helmet. Bundled A player being checked hard. C Cage\u00a0 Metal grid that attaches to the front of a helmet to protect the face. Cannonading Drive\u00a0 A very hard slap-shot taken from the point. Catcher or Catch glove\u00a0 The webbed glove that the goaltender wears on the hand opposite the stick. (Also known as the trapper.) Centre (or center)\u00a0 A forward position whose primary zone of play is the middle of the ice. Change on the fly\u00a0 Substituting a player from the bench while the game clock is running. Cherry picking\u00a0 When a player stays near their opponent's defensive zone waiting for an outlet pass in order to receive a breakaway. Chippy\u00a0 Using, or characterized by, aggressive, rough play or commission of fouls (e.g., \"a chippy player,\" \"a chippy second period\"). Coast to coast\u00a0 A solo scoring chance originating in the player's own defensive zone. Coincidental penalties\u00a0 When both teams are assessed an equal amount of penalties at the same time, usually on the same play or incident. Contract year\u00a0 The last year of a multi-year contract. Cookie jar\u00a0 Top section of the net (e.g., \"Put that biscuit right in the cookie jar!\"). Also see \"top shelf\". Crashing the net\u00a0 Players head with full steam to the front of the net, into the goalie's space and/or straight into the goalie. Also known as crashing the crease. Crease\u00a0 The blue ice in front of each net. Cross-checking\u00a0 The act of checking an opponent with the shaft of the stick held in both hands. This is illegal and earns a minor or major penalty depending on the severity of the infraction. D D to D\u00a0 A pass from one defenseman to another defenseman, both on the same team. Dangle\u00a0 See Deke. Dangler\u00a0 A player who has exceptionally good stick handling abilities and can easily fool opposing players. Defensive zone\u00a0 The defending team's zone as determined by the blue line. Deke\u00a0 When a player handles the puck or himself in such a manner to fool the opponent into moving out of position, allowing the player to get past. Originated from the word decoy. Delay of game\u00a0 Deliberately causing a stoppage of play; player is penalized with a minor penalty. Delayed offside\u00a0 If a player enters the attacking zone ahead of the puck but does not touch it, the play is offside but no whistle is blown immediately, thus creating a delayed offside. When all players from the offside team leave their offensive zone and go into the neutral zone the linesman cancels the offside infraction. Conversely, if the offending team touches the puck before leaving their offensive zone the whistle is blown for the offside infraction. Delayed penalty\u00a0 When a penalty is called, the referee will raise his or her arm to indicate that one is being called, but if the team who committed the infraction is not in control of the puck, no whistle will be blown until a player from the offending team controls the puck. Delayed whistle\u00a0An official waits to blow his whistle, usually due to a delayed offside or delayed penalty call. Dirty\u00a0 Physical play in hockey, typically consisting of disallowed techniques such as elbowing, high-sticking, cross-checking, and/or fighting. Dipsy Doodle\u00a0 A fancy deke which fools the opponent, allowing the puck handler to sneak past 'in style'. Dive\u00a0 When a player embellishes contact made against him in order to entice the referee into calling a penalty against the opposition; however sometimes this ends up in a \"unsportsmanlike conduct\" penalty being called against the embellishing player. Donkey Kong\u00a0 When a goaltender is on his stomach and the shot is going over the goaltender's body, the goaltender bends both legs up to try to block the puck in mid air and from going into the net (usually used in the most desperate situations). Drop pass\u00a0 When a player passes the puck behind himself to a teammate. Dropping the mitts\u00a0 See fisticuffs. Dummied\u00a0 When a player is hit hard and lays on the ice without moving for at least 3 seconds. Dump and chase\u00a0 An offensive strategy used to get the puck over the opposing team's blue line and into the corners where players can race to get it, thereby moving the play into the attacking zone. E Empty net goal\u00a0 A goal scored when the opposing goalie is not on the ice. Enforcer\u00a0 A player quick to fight who defends his teammates against violent members of the other team. Extra attacker\u00a0 A player who has been substituted for the team's goaltender on the ice. F Faceoff\u00a0 The method used to begin play at the beginning of a period or after a stoppage of play. The two teams line up in opposition to each other. One player from each team attempts to gain control of the puck after it is dropped by an official between their sticks onto a \"face-off spot\" on the ice . Face wash\u00a0 When a player rubs his hockey glove over the face of an opponent. Fan\u00a0 When a player misses the puck when attempting to play or shoot it. Filthy\u00a0 Something that is unreal or referring to an amazing play or style Fisticuffs\u00a0 A fight. Five on three\u00a0 Five on three (also called two-man advantage) is when one team has had two players sent to the penalty box. This leaves the opponent with five skaters (i.e., not including the goaltender) to penalized team's three. The team with the advantage has a very good chance of scoring during this period of play. Five on five\u00a0 See full strength. Five-hole\u00a0 The gap between a goaltender's legs. Flop\u00a0 When the tongue of the skate is bent, 90 degrees or more, at the ankle, i.e. Sean Avery has the filthiest flop in the show. Flow\u00a0 The swift act of dangling on the rush, or a player's hair coming out of the back of their helmet, i.e. Jaromir Jagr's got some filthy flow. Forechecking\u00a0 Checking in the offensive zone in order to gain control of the puck and set up a scoring opportunity. Freezing the puck\u00a0 The act of trapping the puck so it cannot be played. Full strength\u00a0 Full strength (also called 5-on-5) refers to when both teams have five skaters and one goaltender on the ice. G Gate\u00a0 See penalty box. Garbage goal\u00a0 A goal that takes little talent to score. Most such goals are scored from right in front of the net, often when the goaltender is out of position. Goal\u00a0 A goal is scored when a puck completely crosses the goal line within the goal frame. Goal line\u00a0 The line that the puck must completely cross in order to be considered a goal. Goon\u00a0 See Enforcer (usually refers to an enforcer that plays for the other team). Gong Show\u00a0 1) A player that usually is above the average size and thinks he is the best player out on the ice, but really is awful (refer to bender). 2) A game that devolves into a series a fights and altercations, often with numerous players being thrown out of the game. Gordie Howe hat trick\u00a0 A Gordie Howe hat trick is when one player scores a goal, notches an assist and gets into a fight all in the same game (a natural Gordie Howe hat trick occurs when a player does all three in one period, however many playersWho? see this as ostentatious and it can be frowned upon in some hockey circles). Greasy\u00a0 As in a 'greasy goal' or a 'greasy win' that is not pretty, but gets the job done through hard work. Gretzky's office\u00a0 The area behind the net, made known by Wayne Gretzky for his ability to set up and score goals from there. Grinder\u00a0 Hockey grinder H Hand pass\u00a0 The act of passing the puck using one's hand. This is legal inside a team's defensive zone, but illegal in the neutral zone and attacking zone, even if the pass originates from another zone. Hash marks\u00a0 The straight lines from the faceoff circles in front of both nets. Used to line up faceoffs. Haymaker\u00a0 A fighting fist swing coined from hockey fights, where you swing your fist in a wide arc starting behind you and coming wide around with a straight arm to catch the opponent from the side. Hat-trick\u00a0 When one player scores three goals in one game. High stick\u00a0 The act of hitting a player in the head or shoulders with a stick. Also the act of hitting the puck in the air above the height of the top goal pipe (4'). Hip checking\u00a0 Using the hip to knock an opponent against the boards or to the ice. Home-ice advantage\u00a0 The ability to make the last line change. Hockey bag\u00a0 a duffel bag for hockey equipment. Hooking\u00a0 Using a stick to hold or slow down a player (illegal). Howitzer\u00a0 A very fast slap shot. Hoser\u00a0 In pre-Zamboni days, the losing team had to hose the ice down with water. I Icing\u00a0 Icing occurs when a player shoots the puck across both the center red line and the opposing team's goal line without the puck going into the net or being able to be touched by an opposing player in their neutral or defensive zones. If an offensive player touches the puck first after it crosses both the red line and the goal line, icing is negated. When icing occurs, a linesman stops play. Play is resumed with a faceoff in the defending zone of the team that committed the infraction (with the team that committed the infraction being unable to make a line change during the stoppage). J Jill\u00a0 See jock. Jock\u00a0 A jock (or for females, a jill) are simple devices used to protect the genitalia of an ice hockey player. Jersey, Jersied, Jerseying\u00a0 In a hockey fight, pulling the opponent jersey over their head so they are stuck inside the jersey while you continue to fight. Jibbs\u00a0 the teeth L Laser\u00a0 A hard, accurate shot. Laying on the lumber See Slashing. Left wing\u00a0 See Winger. Left wing lock\u00a0 The left wing lock is a defensive ice hockey strategy similar to the neutral zone trap. In the most basic form, once puck possession changes, the left wing moves back in line with the defensemen. Each defender (including the left winger) play a zone defense and are responsible for a third of the ice each. Since there are normally only two defensemen, this tactic helps to avoid odd man rushes. Light the lamp\u00a0 Scoring a goal. Line brawl\u00a0 A series of fights involving most, or all, players on the ice at the same time. Long change\u00a0 In the second period, the goaltenders change ends, meaning that the players' bench is closer to the offensive zone rather than the defensive zone. The \"long change\" can be a factor when a tired line is stuck in the defensive zone and cannot come off due to the increased distance to the bench. Long side\u00a0 The side of the goal furthest from the shooter. M Man advantage\u00a0 When one team is penalized, and one of its players sent to the penalty box, the second team maintains a man advantage for the duration of the penalty (Major penalty) or until a goal is scored (Minor penalty). If two penalties are called on one team there will be a two man advantage. If more than two penalties are called on one team the man advantage is limited to two men. Man on A warning from teammates to a player that an opposing player (that he may be unaware of) is near him. Usually given in loose puck situations. Murphy dump\u00a0 The technique of clearing the puck out of the defensive zone by lifting it high above the oppositions heads, with it dropping before reaching the opposing goal line. (popularized by Larry Murphy while with the Pittsburgh Penguins.) N Natural hat-trick\u00a0 A player scores three goals in a row without any player from either team scoring in between them, also when three goals are scored by one player in one period. Neutral zone trap\u00a0 A defensive strategy focused on preventing the opposing team from proceeding with the puck through the neutral zone (the area between both blue lines) and attempting to take the puck from the opposing team. O Odd man rush\u00a0 When a team enters the attacking zone and outnumbers the opposing players in the zone. Offensive zone\u00a0 See Attack zone. One timer\u00a0 The act of shooting the puck directly off a pass without playing the puck in any way. P Paddle\u00a0 The wide portion above the blade of a goalie's stick. Penalty box The area where a player sits to serve the time of a given penalty, for an offense not severe enough to merit outright expulsion from the contest (sometimes called the sin bin or bin). Playmaker\u00a0 A fast player who usually scores more assists than goals. A Playmaker has the speed and balance to make plays, and frequently relies on a sniper to finish them. (e.g. Joe Thornton) Playoff beard\u00a0 The superstitious practice of a hockey player not shaving off his facial hair during the playoffs, consequently growing a beard. Plus-minus\u00a0 A hockey statistic that can apply to a player or an offensive or defensive line indicating whether they were on the ice when the opposing team scored (a minus) or on the ice when their team scored (a plus). The point\u00a0 A player in the opponent's end zone at the junction of the blue line with the boards is said to be at the point. Poke checking\u00a0 Using the stick to poke the puck away from an opponent. Pond hockey\u00a0 A form of outdoor hockey similar to shinny. A fan might state that their team 'looks like they're playing pond hockey' if the players are not displaying the heart or concentration upon the game that their elite professional level demands. Power forward\u00a0 A power forward is a large, muscular offensive player (6'0\" - 6'5\", 210 to 240 pounds), with the mobility to track a puck to the corners of the rink, the physical toughness required to dig it out, and the puck-handling skills to get it back to anyone in front of the net. Powerplay\u00a0 A powerplay occurs when one team has more players on the ice than the other team as a result of penalties assessed to the shorthanded team. Pull the goalie\u00a0 Removing the goalie from the ice in order to temporarily replace him with an extra skater (attacker). This usually occurs in the final minutes of the game when a team is behind by 1 or 2 goals and can be surprisingly effective for a last ditch effort. Q Quick whistle A stoppage in play that occasionally occurs when an on-ice official view of the puck is obstructed while the puck is still moving or playable but the official stops the play with a whistle. The most common example of this is a goaltender appearing to have trapped the puck underneath his catcher, yet the puck is still freely moving and within legal striking distance of the opposing players. The official will whistle the play \"dead\" with the puck still visible to others. This often draws an unfavorable reaction from hometown crowds when the whistle negates a perceived scoring chance for the home team. R Rearguard\u00a0 A defenseman. Rebound\u00a0 A rebound occurs when the puck bounces off a goalie, a player, or the net (or occasionally, the back boards) after a shot on goal. Referee's crease\u00a0 The semi-circular area at the red line along the scorer's bench into which a player may not follow a referee. Ringing the pipe\u00a0 A hard shot that squarely hits the goal post or crossbar and makes a ringing sounds. Note; this is not scored as a shot on goal. Rink rat A pond hockey or shinny player that always seems to be around to play in a pick-up game. Also, a father of a youth hockey player who always attends every game, even if it's not his own son's. Is often known well by both the players and parents. Right wing\u00a0 See Winger. Ripple the twine\u00a0 Scoring a goal. Rocked Big hit. Roofie Shooting high on a goalie that always drops to his pads; shooting for the \"roof\" of the net. Roughing\u00a0 Penalty for aggressively interfering with another player (punch, unnecessary hits etc.) S Sauce\u00a0 The amount of force put into a shot or pass (e.g., \"I put a lot of sauce on that pass, didn't think you would get it!\" or \"Shoulda put more sauce on that one...). Reference is usually to hot sauce, or mustard, being that they both pack a punch. Saucer pass\u00a0 An airborne pass from one player to another. It is called a saucer pass because the puck resembles a flying saucer in mid air. Saucer\u00a0 A saucer pass. Screened shot\u00a0 A shot that the goaltender cannot see due to other players obscuring it. Shadow\u00a0 When a player is assigned to 'shadow' or follow a player (usually of exceptional skill) to hamper their impact upon the game. Shaft\u00a0 The long part of the stick that is straight and is held by the player. Shorthanded\u00a0 A team is said to be shorthanded when they have fewer players on the ice than the opposing team as a result of penalties. Shortside\u00a0 The side of the goal closest to the shooter. Shot on goal\u00a0 A shot that will enter the goal if it is not stopped by the goaltender. A shot on goal must result in either a goal or a save (shots that hit the main pipes of the goal are not counted as shots). Show\u00a0 Term for the pros/NHL. Shuffle the muffin\u00a0 See deke. Shutdown\u00a0 A defensive play that stops an offensive play. Shutdown player A player skilled at defensive play. Shutdown pair Two forwards or defensemen working together, fundamentally to stop the opposing teams offense players. Sin bin\u00a0 The penalty box.; Sieve\u00a0 Refers to a goalie who allows a lot of goals. Slapshot\u00a0 A slapshot is a hard shot, usually with a big wind up, wherein the player bends his stick on the ice and allows the energy stored in bending the stick to launch the puck forward. Slashing\u00a0 Striking an opponent's arms or lower body with the hockey stick. Usually a penalty is incurred. Slew foot Sweeping or kicking out a player's skate or tripping them from behind, causing them to fall backwards. Slot\u00a0 Slot is the area on the hockey rink directly in front of the goaltender between the face-off circles on each side. Slow whistle\u00a0 When an official is slow to blow his whistle compared to when the whistle would be blown under similar circumstances. Snap shot\u00a0 A snap shot is a like an abbreviated slap shot. The purpose of the snap shot is to combine the main advantages of the wrist shot (shot accuracy and quick delivery) and the slap shot (puck speed). The stick should start at your hip when shooting. Sniper\u00a0 A player with a powerful, accurate shot skilled at finishing plays. Snipers frequently score more goals than assists. Snipers can be either forwards or defensemen. Spin-o-rama\u00a0 A phrase coined by sportscaster Danny Gallivan to describe a player completing several tight circles with the puck fully under control of his stick, eluding pursuing opponents who cannot keep up or intercept the player. Split the D\u00a0 When an offensive player confuses or out maneuvers two defensemen in order to get between them. Stack the pads\u00a0 A save wherein the goaltender drops to one side and makes the save with his leg pads. Stands on his head\u00a0 When the goaltender makes many spectacular saves, usually resulting in a win for his team. Stay-at-home defenseman\u00a0 A defenseman who plays very defensively. He doesn't skate with the puck toward the offensive zone very often but will look to pass first. Usually the last player to leave his defensive zone. Stick checking\u00a0 Using the stick to interfere with an opponent's stick. Stickhandling\u00a0 The act of controlling the puck with one's stick, especially while maneuvering through opponents. Stoned\u00a0 A goalkeeper makes a great save and the shooter is \"stoned\". Stripes\u00a0 Referees. Style\u00a0 Refers to whether the player has a good setup of equipment. For example \"Man you got some dirty style going on\".\u00a0; Sweep checking\u00a0: Using the stick in a sweeping motion to knock the puck away from an opponent or deter him from passing. Sunburn\u00a0 When the red goal indicator light lights up a lot behind a goalie, he gets sunburned. T T-bar\u00a0 The front, top bar on the frame of a hockey net, running perpendicular to the posts. Tilly\u00a0 A fight. See \"Fisticuffs\" Toe drag\u00a0 Dragging the puck along the ice with the end (toe) of the stick blade on the ice as opposed to pushing with the bottom edge. Top ched\u00a0 See \"Top Shelf\" Top shelf\u00a0 The top section of the net. The trap\u00a0 Also called the \"neutral zone trap\", is a defensive-style hockey strategy in which a team loads up the neutral zone with players so that the opposing team has a difficult time crossing the blue line and gaining the zone. It is considered to be very boring to watch. Trapezoid\u00a0 In the NHL, the trapezoidal area behind the goal line and net where the goaltender may touch the puck. A minor penalty (delay of game) is assessed if the goaltender plays the puck behind the goal line outside of the trapezoid. Trapper\u00a0 See Catch glove. Trolley tracks\u00a0 Coined by Don Cherry, the trolley tracks are two 'lanes' in the neutral zone, located midway between the center face-off dot and the boards, spanning from blue-line to blue-line. They are named this due to the common occurrence of a forward receiving a pass from his defense-man during breakout, and then getting completely demolished by an opposing player, usually because they are still looking back at where the pass had originated. This pass is often referred to as a suicide pass. It can be blamed on either the defense-man for setting up such an obvious pass, or the player receiving the pass for not keeping their head up. Twig A player's stick. Two-way forward A forward who handles the defensive aspects of the game as well as the offensive aspects.. U Undressing The act of the puck carrier displaying exceptional skill in out-maneuvering the defender, usually in a 1 on 1 situation with the last defender. \"He undresses the defenseman and walks in on goal!\" V Video goal judge An off-ice official who reviews a goal by video instant replay. W Waffle\u00a0 The goalie's blocker. This term stemmed from the visual appearance of the blocker in the pre-modern ice hockey equipment era (also refer to waffle-boarding). Waffle-boarding A quick save with the goalie's blocker, usually a sideways-sweeping motion. Play-by-play announcer Mike Emrick often uses the term in his broadcasts. Wagon A washed up, typically post 20's player. Past their prime but haven't hung up the skates yet. Wheel\u00a0 Typically referred to when there is time and space to skate with the puck, sometimes is said to tell someone to skate faster. Wheeling\u00a0 The act of trying to pursue girls outside the hockey rink. Wheels\u00a0 A player's skates. Whole Sale\u00a0When every single player from a team changes on the fly (except the goalie). Also could be used with just one single offensive line changing. Winger\u00a0 A winger is a forward position of a player whose primary zone of play on the ice is along the outer playing area. A right winger is responsible for the right-hand side of the ice and a left winger is responsible for the left-hand side. Wrap around\u00a0 Scoring from behind the net. Wrist shot\u00a0 A type of shot that involves using arm muscles (especially those in the wrist and forearm) to propel a puck forward from the open-faced, concave part of the blade of a hockey stick. X Y Yard sale\u00a0 When a player gets knocked to the ice and loses a piece of his equipment; or when a team wins an important game and throws their hockey gloves/sticks/helmets all about the ice. Z Zamboni\u00a0 See ice resurfacer. Zone\u00a0 One of three zones on the ice, the offensive zone, the neutral zone and the defensive zone. Zebra See referee. See also Ice hockey statistics This page uses content from Wikipedia. The original article was at List of ice hockey terminology. The list of authors can be seen in the page history. As with Ice Hockey Wiki, the text of Wikipedia is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike License 3.0 (Unported) (CC-BY-SA). Retrieved from \"https://icehockey.fandom.com/wiki/List_of_ice_hockey_terminology?oldid=415841\" Categories: Terminology Fan Feed More Ice Hockey Wiki 1 Seventh Player Award 2 Manitoba Junior Hockey League Explore Wikis Attack on Titan Wiki BoJack Horseman Wiki American Horror Story Wiki Explore Games Movies TV Wikis Follow Us Overview About Careers Press Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Global Sitemap Local Sitemap Community Community Central Support Fan Contributor Program WAM Score Help Can't find a community you love? Create your own and start something epic. Start a wiki The FANDOM App Take your favorite fandoms with you and never miss a beat Advertise Media Kit Contact Ice Hockey Wiki is a FANDOM Lifestyle Community. View Mobile Site Capt. Marvel Hulk Thor", "Ice wedge explained You are here Everything Explained.Today A-Z Contents I IC ICE ICE ICE W Ice wedge Ice wedge explained An ice wedge is a crack in the ground formed by a narrow or thin piece of ice that measures up to 3\u20134 meters in length at ground level and extends downwards into the ground up to several meters. During the winter months, the water in the ground freezes and expands. Once temperatures reach \u221217 degrees Celsius or lower, the ice that has already formed acts like a solid and expands to form cracks in the surface known as ice wedges. As this process continues over many years ice wedges can grow, up to the size of a swimming pool. Ice wedges usually appear in a polygonal pattern known as ice wedge polygons. The cracks can also be filled with materials other than ice, especially sand, and then they're called sand wedges. Formation There are many theories that attempt to explain the origin of ice wedges but only one has been consistently supported by most prominent scientists: the thermal contraction theory. Thermal contraction theory The thermal contraction theory states that during the winter months, thermal contraction cracks form only a few cm wide and a couple of metres deep because of the extreme cold weather.[1] Over the next few months, the snow melts and the remaining water fills the cracks and the permafrost below the surface freezes it. These tiny cracks turn into permafrost. Once the summer months arrive, the permafrost expands; horizontal compression produces upturning of the frozen sediment by plastic deformation. The next winter the cold refreezes and cracks the already forming ice wedge, opening a way for the melting snow of spring to fill the empty crack. The mean annual air temperature thought needed to form ice wedges is \u22126\u00b0 to \u22128\u00b0C or colder.[2] Forms There are three different forms of ice wedges: active, inactive and casts. All three forms are prevalent today and can be found in different parts of the world. Active Active ice wedges are those that are still evolving and growing. During each year, a layer of ice will be added if cracking occurs, but cracking need not occur every year to be considered active. The area in which most ice wedges remain active is along the permafrost zone. The number of active ice wedges that are cracking yearly is consistently declining as they become inactive.[3] Inactive Inactive ice wedges are wedges that are no longer cracking and growing. Throughout the winter months, the wedge does not split and therefore in the summer no new water is added.[3] Casts In areas of past permafrost, ice wedges have melted and are no longer filled with ice. The wedge, which is now empty, is filled with sediment and dirt from the surrounding walls. These are called ice wedge casts and are used to estimate the climate of hundreds of thousands of years ago. Types Ice wedges have historically been classified into two main categories: epigenetic and syngenetic[4] . The type of an ice wedges refer to the way in which the wedge grows over time. Relatively recent field studies have revealed a new type of ice wedge: anti-syngenetic. Currently, these are the only three distinctly classified types of ice wedges observed in nature[5] . The differences among the growth patterns of epigenetic, syngenetic and anti-syngenetic wedges then depend upon ground surface conditions, i.e. whether the ground level remains essentially unchanged or whether there is addition or loss of material[4] . Epigenetic \u2018Epigenetic\u2019 in geological terms refers to geological features that formed after the formation of the surrounding materials. In relation to ice wedges, this means that epigenetic ice wedges are found to form in preexisting permafrost, and are not formed at the same time as the permafrost meaning they are much younger than the surrounding material. An ice wedge being epigenetic also refers to the fashion in which they grow. These types of ice wedges grow considerably wider over their lifetime, but rarely any deeper or taller. This means that epigenetic ice wedges can grow to at most 3-5 meters in width, but stay roughly the same depth/height as when they had formed[6] . Typically, the sediments on either side of an epigenetic ice wedge, adjacent to the edges of the wedge exhibit upward bending. In an epigenetic ice wedge, the age of the ice on the periphery changes little from top to bottom. Syngenetic Syngenetic ice wedges, like the epigenetic variety, find their roots in the geological term syngenetic, which means forming at the same time as the surrounding material[6] . This is because syngenetic ice wedges grow as the upper permafrost surface rises in response to the addition of material on the ground surface[4] . This allows syngenetic ice wedges to grow very deep, as the surface around them rises with the accumulation of alluvium (in floodplains), peat (in tundra), and gelifluction deposits (at the bottom of a slope), among other materials[4] . Syngenetic ice wedges may only form if the thermal contraction and subsequent ice-veinlet growth can keep pace with the addition of new material. If this is the case, the ice wedge can reach depths of 25 meters, but the average is much less[6] . In a syngenetic ice wedge, the age of the ice on the periphery decreases upwards. Anti-Syngenetic Anti-syngenetic ice wedge were first observed in 1990 during the fieldwork of J. Ross Mackay. Mackay found that anti-syngenetic grew in conditions opposite to those of syngenetic ice wedges in that the anti-syngenetic variety required the removal of material instead of the accumulation and addition of material[4] . Anti-syngenetic ice wedges only form on slopes, where there is a net loss of materials erosion. Similar to syngenetic ice wedges, anti-syngenetic ice wedges can only occur if the rate of thermal contraction cracking and ice-veinlet growth keeps pace with the removal of active material[4] . Anti-syngenetic ice wedges therefore only grow downwards, penetrating deeper into the soil only as the upper layers are removed by mass wasting and erosion[4] . In an anti-syngenetic ice wedge, the age of the ice on the periphery increases upwards. Notes and References Web site: Ice wedges, polygons and pingos. 2006-02-14. 2008-05-26. U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service - Alaska. Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. yes. https://web.archive.org/web/20080518202351/http://arctic.fws.gov/permcycl.htm. 2008-05-18. Web site: Permafrost: Origins. Britannica Online Encyclopedia. 2008-05-26. Web site: Permafrost: Active wedges, inactive wedges, and ice-wedge casts. Britannica Online Encyclopedia. 2008-05-26. Mackay. J. Ross. 1990. Some observations on the growth and deformation of epigenetic, syngenetic and anti-syngenetic ice wedges.. Permafrost and Periglacoal Processes. 1. 15-29. Wiley. Hariprasad C. (2011) Epigenetic Ice. In: Singh V.P., Singh P., Haritashya U.K. (eds) Encyclopedia of Snow, Ice and Glaciers. Encyclopedia of Earth Sciences Series. Springer, Dordrecht Subcommittee, P., 1988. Glossary of permafrost and related ground-ice terms. Associate Committee on Geotechnical Research, National Research Council of Canada, Ottawa, 156. This article is licensed under the GNU Free Documentation License. It uses material from the Wikipedia article \"Ice wedge\". Except where otherwise indicated, Everything.Explained.Today is \u00a9 Copyright 2009-2018, A B Cryer, All Rights Reserved. Cookie policy.", "An Error Occurred Setting Your User Cookie An Error Occurred Setting Your User Cookie This site uses cookies to improve performance. If your browser does not accept cookies, you cannot view this site. Setting Your Browser to Accept Cookies There are many reasons why a cookie could not be set correctly. Below are the most common reasons: You have cookies disabled in your browser. You need to reset your browser to accept cookies or to ask you if you want to accept cookies. Your browser asks you whether you want to accept cookies and you declined. To accept cookies from this site, use the Back button and accept the cookie. Your browser does not support cookies. Try a different browser if you suspect this. The date on your computer is in the past. If your computer's clock shows a date before 1 Jan 1970, the browser will automatically forget the cookie. To fix this, set the correct time and date on your computer. You have installed an application that monitors or blocks cookies from being set. You must disable the application while logging in or check with your system administrator. Why Does this Site Require Cookies? This site uses cookies to improve performance by remembering that you are logged in when you go from page to page. To provide access without cookies would require the site to create a new session for every page you visit, which slows the system down to an unacceptable level. What Gets Stored in a Cookie? This site stores nothing other than an automatically generated session ID in the cookie; no other information is captured. In general, only the information that you provide, or the choices you make while visiting a web site, can be stored in a cookie. For example, the site cannot determine your email name unless you choose to type it. Allowing a website to create a cookie does not give that or any other site access to the rest of your computer, and only the site that created the cookie can read it.", "Category:Arctic geography terminology - Wikipedia Help Category:Arctic geography terminology From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Pages in category \"Arctic geography terminology\" The following 34 pages are in this category, out of 34 total. This list may not reflect recent changes (learn more). A Active layer Arctic Basin Arctic haze Aufeis AuroraB Boreas PlainC Canadian Arctic tundra Cryosphere CryosuctionG Gas hydrate pingo Gelisol Greenland PlainH HummockM Midnight sun Molloy DeepN Novaya Zemlya effectP Patterned ground Permafrost Pingo Polar drift Polar night Polar route PolynyaS Sastrugi Septentrional Subarctic Syngenetic permafrost growthT Talik True north TundraV Polar vortexY Yedoma Yukon Ice PatchesZ Zero-curtain effect Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Category:Arctic_geography_terminology&oldid=745559137\" Categories: Geography terminologyGeography of the Arctic Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces CategoryTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata item Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version Languages \u0641\u0627\u0631\u0633\u06ccGaelgT\u00fcrk\u00e7e\u0627\u0631\u062f\u0648Ti\u1ebfng Vi\u1ec7t Edit links This page was last edited on 21 October 2016, at 21:11\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "Hockey Terminology | Weekend Warriors Hockey 1-814-673-2000 Home Camp Locations 2019 Camp Locations Ann Arbor 2019 Atlanta 2019 Boston 2019 Buffalo 2019 Lake Tahoe 2019 Minneapolis 2019 Morristown 2019 Pittsburgh 2019 Shelton 2019 Vail 2019 Washington, DC 2019 Potential New Locations About Camps Who Should Attend? New Players Experienced Players Women Goalies Testimonials Our Philosophy What You Get Typical Schedule Camp Types Download Brochure Cancellation/Change Policy Guarantee Scholarship Program FAQ Preparing for Camp Flying with Hockey Gear Coaches Coaches \u2013 General Attributes Coach Biographies Join Our Staff Pay Register for Camp Pay Camp Balance Player Dashboard Camp Gift Certificate Merchandise Payment Blog Resources Hockey Terminology Goalie Ebook Contact Hockey Terminology In reading post camp evaluations, one thing that has been requested, is for us to define some of the terminology that we use both on the ice and in our chalk talks.\u00a0 This makes sense.\u00a0 While those of you that have been playing and/or watching the game for years may be familiar with most of these terms, the newbie player may be hearing them for the first time.\u00a0 Not understanding the language quite naturally impedes the learning process, and that is the last thing we want.\u00a0\u00a0 Thus, we have created this dictionary of basic terminology.\u00a0 We will add new terms to the list periodically, as the need arises.\u00a0 Do you have a term you would like defined?\u00a0 E-mail rick@weekendwarriorshockey and we will do our best to define it and add it here. To have a little fun with this, in addition to the basic terminology required, there are also quite a few fun slang terms used by hockey players.\u00a0 While these slang terms may not be crucial in learning how to be a better player, they certainly help one become more understanding of the hockey culture.\u00a0 The regular terms are in black, and the slang terms are in red. Backchecking \u2013 The act of skating back to your defensive zone and applying pressure to opposing players when they have possession of the puck and are on the rush.\u00a0 We often joke \u201cwhat is backchecking\u201d, because adult league players are notorious for not being very motivated backcheckers.\u00a0 It should be noted that backchecking is NOT the act of checking someone in the back with your stick.\u00a0 That is known as cross checking, and is a penalty. Bar Down \u2013 A shot that hits the bottom of the crossbar and goes right down into the net.\u00a0 Such a shot is normally responsible for an enormous grin by the shooter and for oohs and aahs from everyone else (except maybe the goalie). Barn \u2013 A rink or arena.\u00a0 As in \u201cThey have to come play in our barn tonight.\u201d Beauty/Beautician \u2013 A player that is talented, both on and off the ice, and loved by his teammates. Bender \u2013 Short for ankle bender, a derogatory term for a player who bends his ankles when skating. Biscuit \u2013 The puck Break out:\u00a0When a team gains control of the puck in their defensive end they will \u201cbreak out\u201d with the puck to go on the attack. \u00a0 Most teams have established break out plays to accomplish this important part of the game. Celly \u2013 A celebration after a goal is scored Change on the fly: \u00a0A team may change its players even as play continues. This is known as \u201cchanging on the fly.\u201d A player coming on the rink cannot play the puck until the player they are replacing is off the rink. Cherry Picker \u2013\u00a0 A player who stays at center ice and does not help their team on defense. \u00a0They hope to pick up a break out pass with no defenders in their way. Chip \u2013 We normally use the term \u201cchip\u201d in the context of \u201cchip off the boards\u201d.\u00a0 This is where the puck is shot off the boards, normally up off the ice.\u00a0 The purpose could be to merely clear the puck out of the zone.\u00a0 More often it is a passing maneuver, where you are chipping the puck off the boards to a space where you expect your teammate to be able to get it.\u00a0 However, you can even chip it off the boards to yourself, as a means of getting around an opponent. Chirp \u2013 Trash talk directed at an opponent, the opposing team\u2019s bench, or the refs. Cycling: Cycling is an offensive strategy used to keep control of the puck by keeping it close the boards. Offensive players make short passes to each other along the boards until they see an opening to pass to a teammate who is moving into the slot for a shot. Deke (Deking):\u00a0A deke is used by an offensive player with the puck to confuse a defender or goalie. It is a fake or feint move. \u00a0A common deke is to lower the shoulder in one direction but actually turn in the other. Delayed Penalty \u2013 A penalty that has not yet resulted in a stoppage of play because the team that will have the man advantage is in possession of the puck.\u00a0 Play continues until the team being penalized gains control of the puck.\u00a0 The referee will raise his arm indicating that there is a delayed penalty situation.\u00a0 The team with possession will send their goalie off the ice in exchange for another attacker, as it would be nearly impossible for the penalized team to score, as play will stop when the penalized team gets the puck.\u00a0 This essentially extends the length of time the non-penalized team has the man advantage. If a goal is scored before the play is stopped, then the penalty is waived off. Dots \u2013 \u201cThe dots\u201d is short for face-off dots, or the dots into which the referee drops the puck during a face off. Dump and Chase \u2013 An\u00a0offensive strategy used to get the puck over the opposing team\u2019s blue line and into the corners where players can race to get it, thereby moving the play into the attacking zone. Flow \u2013 Great hockey hair.\u00a0 Typically longer hair that \u201cflows\u201d out of the helmet.\u00a0 A young Jaromir Jagr sported some great flow. Five hole:\u00a0The potential scoring areas around a goal are numbered from one to four starting in the lower right corner and proceeding clockwise at each corner of the net. \u00a0The \u201c5 hole\u201d is between the goalie\u2019s legs. Forecheck \u2013 Checking, battling or applying pressure to the opponent in an attempt to retrieve the puck while in your offensive zone when the other team has possession.\u00a0 Forecheck is also a hockey slang term.\u00a0 In the slang term, the meaning is one of approaching a member of the opposite sex, typically while out at the bar, in an attempt to solicit a phone number or date.\u00a0 As in:\u00a0 \u201cWhere\u2019s Joe?\u201d\u00a0 \u201cOh, he\u2019s up at the bar forechecking that entire bachelorette party.\u201d Game misconduct:\u00a0A player is suspended for the remainder of the game if they receive a game misconduct. \u00a0Their team continues to play at full strength unless a minor penalty is also assessed. Gordie Howe Hat Trick \u2013 A Gordie Howe\u00a0hat trick is a goal, an assist and a fight in a single game.\u00a0 Gordie Howe was both a prolific scorer, and a tough customer who was not afraid to drop the mitts. Grinder \u2013 A player who makes up for a lack of talent by working hard and playing physical.\u00a0 A grinder normally plays on the 3rd or 4th lines, and will battle hard for the puck. Grocery Stick \u2013 A player that sits on the bench the entire game between the forwards and the defensemen, acting like a separator you would use on the conveyor belt at the grocery store to separate your groceries from the next customer in line. Guts of the Ice \u2013 This is simply the area of the ice between the dots, over the entire length of the ice.\u00a0 We typically use this term in the context of \u201cdefending the guts of the ice\u201d.\u00a0 What we mean by that is that we want to keep attacking players from attacking our zone up the middle, or guts of the ice.\u00a0 Rather, we try to keep them \u201coutside the dots\u201d, meaning between the faceoff dots and the boards. Hand Pass \u2013 The act of passing the puck using one\u2019s hand. This is legal inside a team\u2019s defensive zone, but illegal in the neutral zone and attacking zone, even if the pass originates from another zone. Hash marks:\u00a0Hash marks are small lines, which are perpendicular to the edge of the face off circles. Players cannot encroach on the hash mark areas during face-offs. Hat Trick \u2013\u00a0When a player scores three goals in a game it is known as a hat trick. Three goals in a row is a \u201cpure\u201d hat trick.\u200b Headman the puck \u2013\u00a0When a player passes to a teammate that is ahead of them on the attack this is headmanning the puck. Hoser or Hose-head \u2013 A derogatory term.\u00a0 It is believed to have originated from the early days of hockey (before the invention of the Zamboni) when the losing team had to hose down the ice with water after the game. The House \u2013 \u201cThe House\u201d is the area from the goal posts to the face off dots to the tops of the circles, and is best defined with a picture (see illustration at right).\u00a0 Defensively, we talk about \u201cprotecting the house\u201d.\u00a0 This is because this is the area from which most goals are scored.\u00a0 Thus, we want to keep our opponents from having opportunities to shoot from inside the house. Interference:\u00a0A two minute minor penalty will be imposed on a player who interferes with or impedes the progress of an opponent who is not in possession of the puck, or who deliberately knocks a stick out of an opponent\u2019s hand or who prevents a player who has dropped his stick or any other piece of equipment from regaining possession of it. Lettuce\u00a0\u2013 A great head of hockey hair. \u00a0See also flow, salad. Long Change \u2013 In the second period, the goaltenders change ends, meaning that the players\u2019 bench is closer to the offensive zone rather than the defensive zone. The \u201clong change\u201d can be a factor when a tired line is stuck in the defensive zone and cannot come off due to the increased distance to the bench. Mitts \u2013 A player\u2019s hands or gloves.\u00a0 Gordie Howe was known to have large mitts (hands), and he was not afraid to \u201cdrop the mitts\u201d (fight). Odd Man Rush \u2013 When the number of offensive players heading into the attacking zone is greater than the number of defenders, such as a 3-on-2 or a 2-on-1. Offsides\u00a0\u2013\u00a0An offsides is called when a player precedes the puck into the offensive zone as indicated by the blue line. \u00a0When an offside occurs the referee stops play and the face off occurs outside the offensive zone. Olympic Sheet \u2013 An NHL rink is 85\u2032 x 200\u2032. An Olympic rink (or sheet) is 100\u2032 x 200\u2032. \u00a0International competitions are generally played on Olympic sheets. \u00a0This additional 15\u2032 of width can have a dramatic effect on opening up faster play. Pinch \u2013\u00a0A pinch is when a defenseman\u00a0either (a) attempts to hold the offensive blue line when the opponent has the puck and is attempting to clear their zone, or (b) leaves the blue line and pushes further into the offensive zone to play the puck. \u00a0In both cases, the defenseman is making a gamble that he is going to win the puck battle, and thus improve his team\u2019s chance of scoring. \u00a0The risk is that he loses, and the other team goes on the attack with an odd man rush. It is considered a risky play, which requires good judgment. \u00a0A defenseman\u00a0who loses a lot of pinches can expect to be scolded by his coach and/or teammates. Plumber \u2013 Similar to a Grinder.\u00a0 Not the most skilled player, but a hard worker who will battle in the corners and in front of the net. Plus/Minus \u2013\u00a0When a goal is scored for a player\u2019s team while the player is on the ice it is counted as +1. \u00a0If a goal is scored against a player\u2019s team while the player is one the ice it counted as -1. \u00a0The total for the player is known as plus/minus. \u00a0A\u00a0high positive plus/minus number would be indicative of a player who is helping his team. \u00a0The opposite is true for a player with a high negative plus/minus number. \u00a0So even if a player scores a lot of goals, if his plus/minus is high negative, this is an indication that the player is not helping out defensively. \u00a0Of course, there are other factors to be considered. \u00a0This is just an indicator. Point \u2013\u00a0The point is an area just inside the blue line of the attacking zone. It is normally occupied by the attacking team\u2019s defensive players. Sauce \u2013 Short for Saucer pass Sacuer Pass \u2013 A pass in which the puck is passed to another player such that it flies in the air like a flying saucer. This makes the pass very difficult to intercept by opposing players but it will still land flat on the ice making it simple to control for the receiving player. Salad\u00a0\u2013 Beautiful hockey hair. \u00a0See also flow, lettuce. Scoring Chance \u2013 A scoring chance is defined as a clear play directed toward the opposing net from a dangerous scoring area \u2013 loosely defined as the top of the circle in and inside the faceoff dots, though sometimes slightly more generous than that depending on the amount of immediately-preceding puck movement or screens in front of the net. Blocked shots are generally not included but missed shots are. A player is awarded a scoring chance anytime he is on the ice and someone from either team has a chance to score. He is awarded a \u201cchance for\u201d if someone on his team has a chance to score and a \u201cchance against\u201d if the opposing team has a chance to score. Sieve \u2013 A really awful goalie that has a lot of holes through which to score. Slot \u2013 A prime scoring area located between the faceoff circles and in front of the goal. Strong Side/Weak Side \u2013 The strong side is the side of the ice where the puck (and most of the players) are located.\u00a0 The weak side is the other side.\u00a0 We speak of moving the puck from the strong side to the weak side of the ice to get away from pressure.\u00a0 Once the puck goes to the other side (and players follow), then that becomes the strong side. Top Cheese/Top Cheddar \u2013 Used to describe a shot that scores in the top of the net, either off or just below the crossbar. Twig \u2013 A hockey stick (even though very few are made from wood anymore) Wave off \u2013\u00a0When a stoppage of play is about to occur, the referee may decide to continue play by \u201cwaving off\u201d the stoppage. \u00a0Examples include icing and offsides. Player Dashboard (requires login) Get Newsletter Login to this site requires ssl communication.Click here to reload the page over ssl. Username: Password: Remember me Lost your password? Enter your username or email: Back to login", "syngenetic permafrost | National Snow and Ice Data Center Skip to main content National Snow and Ice Data Center Home Data Data Sets for Research Brightness Temperature Glaciers Ice Sheets Permafrost Sea Ice Soil Moisture Snow ...search for more Scientific Data Search Support for Researchers Analysis & Imaging Tools Data Announcements Submit Your Data Data Policies User Support Data for Everyone Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Glacier Photograph Collection Greenland Ice Sheet Today MASIE (Daily sea ice extent) Satellite Observations of Arctic Change Sea Ice Index Virtual Globes: Google Earth Sponsored Programs Antarctic Glaciological Data Center Exchange for Local Observations and Knowledge of the Arctic (ELOKA) NOAA at NSIDC NASA Distributed Active Archive Center at NSIDC (NSIDC DAAC) Looking for facts and information? See About the Cryosphere. Research Scientists Research Grants Scientific Publications Informatics Research NSIDC Scientific Expeditions On Thin Ice: Expedition to a Crumbling Ice Shelf Scientists blog from Antarctica and provide a glimpse of what it's like to do research in the field. Read their blog ... News For the Media Newsroom: For the Media For Data Users Data Announcements The Drift Current Conditions Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Greenland Today Satellite Observations of Arctic Change NSIDC In the News Events NSIDC Monthly Highlights Icelights: Answers to your burning questions about ice and climate What's hot in the news around climate and sea ice and what are scientists talking about now? Read more... About About NSIDC NSIDC People Our Sponsors Jobs NSIDC Monthly Highlights Use & Copyright Contact Us Support NSIDC NSIDC's Green Data Center About the Cryosphere Quick Facts All About The Cryosphere All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Frozen Ground All About Sea Ice All About Arctic Climatology & Meteorology Snow, Ice and Climate Change Studying the Cryosphere Photo Gallery Educational Resources Cryosphere Glossary What is the Cryosphere? When scientists talk about the cryosphere, they mean the places on Earth where water is in its solid form, frozen into ice or snow. Read more ... Web pagesData Sets Cryosphere Glossary - Choose a Topic - climatology and meteorology freshwater ice frozen ground or permafrost glaciers icebergs and ice shelves ice sheets sea ice snow syngenetic permafrostpermafrost that formed through a rise of the permafrost table during the deposition of additional sediment or other earth material on the ground surface.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost Find Data Search NSIDC Data NASA Earthdata Search IceBridge Portal Data Collections List Stay Current Arctic Sea Ice News and Analysis Sea Ice Index (Passive microwave satellite data) MASIE (Daily sea ice extent, multi-source) Greenland Today Newsroom Learn About Snow and Ice Icelights: Answers to Your Questions Cryosphere Quick Facts All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Sea Ice Arctic Climatology - A Primer Get Help Knowledge Base Etc. Use & Copyright Web Policy Jobs Home | Contact Us\u00a9 2019, National Snow and Ice Data Center :: Advancing knowledge of Earth's frozen regions", "The Ultimate Ice Cream Glossary, A to Z - Eater clock menu more-arrow no yes Sweets Week The Ultimate Ice Cream Glossary, A to Z Gelato, frappe, sorbet \u2014 everything you need to know about cold treats by Daniela Galarza Oct 26, 2016, 1:00pm EDT Photography by Dina Avila Share Tweet Share Share The Ultimate Ice Cream Glossary, A to\u00a0Z tweet share Pocket Flipboard Email Despite our global economy, many regional ice cream styles have stayed stubbornly regional. No one outside of New England calls a milkshake a \"frappe.\" Ask someone outside of the San Francisco Bay Area what an Its-It is and they might look at you funny. In Massachusetts, \"Hoodsies,\" and their wooden spoons, were a classic summer treat. But what is ice cream, as its most basic?\u00a0American-style ice cream is a base of cream, milk, sugar, and often eggs that is cooked, cooled, and then churned in a frozen container until it partially freezes while air is incorporated, yielding a frozen but creamy treat. The ratio of dairy fat to sugar is crucial to the product\u2019s final texture. Flavorings like vanilla and chocolate are usually added before the ice cream base is churned. Philadelphia-style ice cream does not contain eggs and is usually sweeter. Milk ice is made without cream; French-style ice cream is always made with cream and eggs; Italian gelato is made with more milk than cream and does not always contain eggs. While ice cream novelties exist in every country in the world, this glossary is focused on American creations and international creations that have found a home in the U.S. (That American history, by the way, is centered firmly on our nation's second state: When I set forth to create a glossary of American ice cream, I didn't realize so much of it \u2014 Breyers, the Banana Split, Mister Softee, and water ice \u2014 originated in Pennsylvania.) Did we miss one of your favorite creations? Do tell us in the comments! Affogato al caffe: The origins are unclear, but it\u2019s a shot of espresso poured over a scoop of gelato. \"Affogato\" means \"drowned\" in Italian. A la mode: Translated from the French, it means \"in the style.\" The French might say, \"glace \u00e1 la mode de Anglais,\" which means ice cream served in the style of the English. But in the U.S., \u00e1 la mode means a dessert served with ice cream on top. It\u2019s often pie, but may also be cake, a brownie, or a cookie. Awful Awful: An ice cream drink popular in Rhode Island and currently sold by Newport Creamery, it\u2019s a blend of flavored syrup, milk, and a frozen-ice-milk blend. It is similar in texture to a frappe, aka a thick milkshake, also from the region. Balboa Bar: A square or rectangle of vanilla ice cream on a stick, dipped in chocolate and coated in salty or sweet toppings like crushed nuts and sprinkles. The Beach Bar is a local variation where the ice cream is dipped and rolled in toppings to order. Banana split: A classic American sundae consisting of a split banana, three scoops of ice cream, and several or all of the following: whipped cream or marshmallow cream, pineapple sauce, cherry sauce, fudge sauce, caramel sauce, peanuts, and at least one cherry. The dessert was invented in 1904 at a drugstore in Latrobe, Pennsylvania. Baskin-Robbins: The world's largest chain of ice cream shops was founded in 1945 by Burt Baskin and his brother-in-law Irv Robbins in Glendale, California. It is known for its 31 Flavors slogan. Today the chain operates over 7,600 shops in nearly 50 countries and is operated by Dunkin\u2019 brands. Ben & Jerry\u2019s: Childhood friends Ben Cohen and Jerry Greenfield founded their namesake ice cream company in 1978 in Burlington, Vermont. Known for its offbeat and occasionally political flavors, it is now owned and operated by Unilever \u2014 though Cohen and Greenfield still retain some creative control. Bomb/Bombe: Ice cream molded into a single-serving sized spherical or half spherical shape. Usually it is covered with a glaze and served as a plated dessert. Bomb Pop: An ice pop which looks roughly like a rocket on a stick. The classic flavor and color combination is cherry (red), lime (white), and blue raspberry (blue), with each flavor getting a third of the total pop. Bomb Pops were invented in 1955 by James S. Merritt and D.S. Abernethy in Kansas City, Missouri. Breyers: An ice cream brand founded in Philadelphia in 1866 by William A. Breyer, who first sold his ice cream out of his home, and later via horse and wagon on the streets. Unilever bought the business from Kraft Foods in 1993. Cabinet: A type of thick milkshake flavored with coffee popularized in Rhode Island. Candy, Chocolate, or Magic shell: A dip for ice cream cones. The base flavor is mixed with coconut oil or melted butter so that when it comes into contact with ice cream, it freezes or hardens instantly, forming a crunchy candy-like coating around the ice cream. Often it\u2019s made with chocolate, but also comes in strawberry and other flavors. Magic Shell is the brand name used by Smucker\u2019s. Carvel: An ice cream company founded by Tom Carvel on an ice cream truck in 1929, today, the company operates more than 400 franchise locations throughout the U.S. It\u2019s especially known for its ice cream cakes, which contain a layer of crunchies, or crisp cookie bits coated in candy shell. Carvel also sells soft serve ice cream, ice cream bars, and ice cream sandwiches. Choco Taco: An ice cream novelty shaped to look like a taco, with a round chocolate waffle-cone \"tortilla\" shell and fudge rippled ice cream filling. It was invented in Philadelphia in the 1980s, and usually topped with peanuts and coated in milk chocolate. Cold Stone Creamery: A brand founded in 1988 in Tempe, Arizona by Susan and Donald Sutherland, who wanted to create a type of ice cream that was \"neither hard-packed nor soft-serve.\" At Cold Stone, ice cream \"base flavors\" like cake batter, mint, and strawberry are scooped out onto a cold marble surface. Using paddles and scoops, staffers add mix-ins like gummy bears, brownies, fresh fruit, sprinkles, or pieces of cake, cookies, or candy. More than 1,500 locations are in operation in 27 countries. Concrete: First popularized in the 1950s, it\u2019s a type of milkshake \u2014 traditionally made using frozen custard instead of lower fat ice cream \u2014 so thick the server could hand it to the customer upside down and it would not drip out. Often mix-ins like slices of pie or candy are blended in. Cone: A cookie-like wafer shaped into a cone (sometimes the same dough or cookie is molded into a cup or another shape). Cones enable ice cream eaters to consume the treat out of hand and without a spoon. According to several sources, the first ice cream cone was created by Ernest Hamwi for the St. Louis World's Fair in 1904. Traditionally, it\u2019s made from a cookie dough or batter which is pressed into a round, waffle-patterned sheet that is then rolled into a cone while warm. Today, there are several different styles, including waffle cones, made from a batter; sugar cones, made from a sweet dough; and wafer cones, made from a starch mixture that is molded and baked into crispy but light cone shapes. Double cones have two openings at the top of the cone to allow for two scoops of ice cream to be placed side-by-side. (The single cone is also known as a \"poke\" in Northern Ireland and Scotland.) Creamsicle: Also called a 50-50 bar, it\u2019s a core of vanilla ice cream on a stick covered in a fruit-flavored ice. The most popular flavor is orange. The novelty is an evolution of the popsicle. See also: Fudgsicle. Cup: When it\u2019s not served in a cone, ice cream is served in a paper, stainless steel, glass, or ceramic cup. Dairy Queen: Founded in Joliet, Illinois in 1940, the franchised Dairy Queen (or DQ) chain is known for its soft-serve ice cream, Blizzards (a milkshake with candy or cookie mix-ins), and various flavors of magic or candy shells. The company operates more than 6,700 locations across the world, and has several different concepts, many of which serve savory fast food in addition to the ice cream treats. Dippin\u2019 Dots: A treat billed as the \"ice cream of the future\" when it was invented by Curt Jones, a Southern Illinois University Carbondale graduate, in 1987. The process involves flash freezing an ice cream base using liquid nitrogen. The process results in small pearls of ice cream that melt on the tongue. Because it must be stored at -40F, the product is not available commercially and is instead sold by franchisees. Drumstick: A sugar cone filled with vanilla ice cream, dipped in nuts and packaged in a wrapper \u2014 with many flavor variations \u2014 the ice cream drumstick was originally invented in 1928 by I.C. Parker of the Drumstick Company of Fort Worth, Texas. The brand name \"Drumstick\" is owned by Nestle. Drumsticks are now produced and sold by Nestle. Dreyer\u2019s: Often mistaken for Breyers, Dreyer's Grand Ice Cream Holdings, Inc., was founded by Joseph Edy and William Dreyer in 1928 as Edy\u2019s Grand Ice Cream of Oakland, California. The partners split in 1947; in 1953, Dreyer renamed the company. Dreyer\u2019s uses a process called low-temperature extrusion, which produces a creamy ice cream but with less fat. Dreyer\u2019s parent company Nestle operates the two largest ice cream plants in the United States. Eskimo Pie: A vanilla ice cream bar covered in chocolate. It was invented in 1919 in Iowa but perfected by the Burt family of Youngstown, Ohio in 1920 when they added a handy stick to the bar. That allowed ice cream fans to eat it without getting a mess on their hands, and the creation was renamed a Good Humor Bar. The Klondike Bar is the brand name of the Eskimo pie. Falude: A Persian frozen dessert consisting of a sweet, often rose water-flavored syrup which is frozen and mixed with softened vermicelli noodles. Almonds or pistachios may also be added or used as toppings. The dessert is said to have originated long ago in the city of Shiraz. Float: The ice cream float \u2014 also known as a coke float, soda float, root beer float, or, in Australia and New Zealand, a \"spider\" \u2014 was invented by Robert McCay Green in Philadelphia, PA, in 1874. Some sources say he ran out of ice for his drinks and opted to use vanilla ice cream instead. According to Sundae Best: A History of Soda Fountains, Green was making cream sodas when he ran out of cream. He dashed to a nearby ice cream shop and filled his pitchers with ice cream, planning to use it in the drinks after it melted But with demand from customers rising he started making the drinks with scoops of frozen ice cream. Floats were popular at soda fountains and during Prohibition; they remain on menus at ice cream shops throughout the U.S. Frappe: In New England, the name of a very thick milkshake. It is pronounced \"frap,\" and rhymes with \"cap.\" In some places it is called a \"Velvet\". Free cone day: A popular promotion among ice cream shops, free cone day started at Ben & Jerry\u2019s in 1979, one year after the brand debuted; it has since been adopted by other ice cream purveyors, including H\u00e4agen-Dazs. Frozen banana: A whole, peeled banana impaled upon a stick lengthwise, frozen, and then dipped in chocolate. Often it is also sprinkled with salty toppings like peanuts. Like the Balboa Bar, it originated on Balboa island off the coast of Newport Beach in Southern California. It was made famous by the cult show Arrested Development. Frozen custard: This term is often used interchangeably with ice cream, but it refers to ice cream made with cream and eggs. Frozen yogurt: Also known as fro-yo, the frozen treat is usually lower in fat than traditional ice cream and has a tart flavor. It is made by freezing yogurt blended into an ice cream base with enough sugar to prevent it from turning icy. Frozen yogurt first gained popularity in the 1970s, though it was criticized as being too sour. Eventually companies like TCBY created formulas that were lighter and sweeter in flavor. Frozen yogurt fell out of favor in the early 2000s, but experienced a resurgence thanks to companies like Pinkberry and 16 Handles. Fudge pop/stick: Commonly known as a Fudgsicle, which is a registered trademark of Unilever, it is a chocolate pudding-based ice pop. See also: Fudgsicle, Creamsicle. Gelato: Italian-style ice cream, which is milk-based rather than cream-based, and is usually described as lighter in flavor but somewhat sweeter. Good Humor: One of the most prolific makers of ice cream novelties, the company created Good Humor Bars; by the 1960s it produced over 85 different variations. Today, the company owns the rights to and manufactures King Cones, ice cream sandwiches, dessert bars, Oreo-flavored novelties, among others. Good Humor Bar: An Eskimo Pie on a stick. Grape-Nuts: A breakfast cereal developed in 1897 made from wheat and barley. There are neither grapes nor nuts in it, though it does have a nutty flavor. In 1919, when a Canadian ice cream maker ran out of fruit, she decided to mix in some breakfast cereal. The deep, almost browned butter flavor of the cereal pairs very well with vanilla ice cream, and that combination, when mixed together, has become a popular flavor in New England, Jamaica, and parts of Canada. H\u00e4agen-Dazs: An ice cream brand created in 1961 by Reuben and Rose Mattus in NYC. Originally, the company only made vanilla, chocolate, and coffee-flavored ice cream. Today, it is licensed to Nestle in the USA and Canada, and is one of the few commercial brands to not use stabilizers or many additives. The company operates scoop shops throughout the U.S. and is widely distributed at grocery and convenience stores. Hoodsie: Since 1947 Massachusetts-based Hood, a dairy company, has made and distributed these small, pre-packaged cups of ice cream. One side of the cup is filled with vanilla ice cream while the other is filled with chocolate. For years the cups came with small wooden spoons but now only large packages for commercial sale contain the spoons. Ice cream cake: Ice cream shaped into a cake and frosted, or ice cream layered between layers of cake. Ice cream roll: A cake roll filled with ice cream and served sliced so as to show the internal spiral. The cake can be a sponge cake or chiffon, which are soft, airy, and flexible when cool. This phrase may also refer to Thai-style ice cream, which is made when ice cream base is poured onto a very cold surface, partially flash-frozen and then curled into rolls and served. Ice cream sandwich: Ice cream, sandwiched between two cookies. The traditional style is vanilla ice cream between two rectangular chocolate wafers. ICEE: A frozen, carbonated drink in soda or fruit juice flavors. Icee's founder, Omar Knedlik, is credited with invented the frozen drink machine in the late 1950s. (See also: Slurpee) Ice pop: The generic term for a popsicle, a juice, pudding, or sweetened water-based frozen treat on a stick. It can also refer to a water-based iced frozen snack packaged in a plastic sheath. Italian ice: Similar in texture to a slushie or Slurpee, it is partially frozen ice. It was popularized in the U.S. by Italian immigrants who were likely making a quick version of granita. It is also known as water ice, or sometimes, \"Philly water ice.\" It\u2019s It: An ice cream sandwich made from two soft oatmeal cookies and vanilla ice cream that is then dipped in chocolate. The treat hails from San Francisco, where it is said to have originated in SF theme part Playland-at-the-Beach in 1928. Jimmies: Chocolate-flavored sprinkles, aka the colorful bits of sugar used for decoration, the word's allegedly racist origins are a\u00a0matter of dispute. See also: sprinkles. Kakig\u014dri: Japanese dish of shaved ice topped with sauces, flavorings, fruit or sweetened condensed milk. The Nestle Drumstick. King Cone: A large drumstick manufactured by Good Humor. Nestle\u2019s competing product is the Drumstick, a smaller packaged ice cream cone. Kulfi: A popsicle popular in India made from a milk base which is flavored with nuts or spices. Milk ice: Popularized during the World Wars, it\u2019s ice cream made only with milk and sugar. The texture is icy due to the lack of fat in the milk. Milkshake: Ice cream blended with milk. Mister Softee: A franchised business of ice cream trucks that serve soft-serve ice cream, milkshakes, sundaes, dipped cones, and ice cream novelties. The Mister Softee brand was founded by the Conway family in 1956; on its first day in business, it charged\u00a0its customers in West Philadelphia just 10 cents per cone. Neapolitan: An ice cream flavor combination of chocolate, strawberry, and vanilla. It was popularized in the late 19th century by Neapolitan immigrants in the U.S. and today is commonly found in the grocery store aisle. Paddle: The partner to an ice cream scoop, it is usually an aluminum tool used to spread or curl ice cream. It can also be used to fold candy, nuts, or other flavorings into an ice cream base. Paletas: Fruit-flavored ice pops made with whole and blended fruit. Popular in Latin America and Latin American neighborhoods in the U.S. Pingsu/Pingsoo: A Korean dish of shaved ice topped with sauces, flavorings, fruit or sweetened condensed milk. Pinkberry: A franchised chain of frozen yogurt shops founded in 2005 and based in Scottsdale, Arizona. Popsicle: The brand name for an ice pop, trademarked by inventor Frank Epperson in 1923. Legally, \"Popsicle\" refers to only the ice pops made by the Unilever corporation. Semifreddo: Literally translated as \"semi-frozen,\" it is an Italian dessert made by freezing a mousse-like sweetened and flavored dairy mixture. Shave ice: Sometimes called\u00a0Hawaiian shave ice, it is made when a block of ice is shaved by a special ice shaver. This shaved ice is piled into a cup and then topped with flavored syrups. Sherbert/Sherbet: Fruit-flavored milk ice, no matter how it\u2019s spelled. Slurpee: A slushie made by 7-Eleven; the convenience store chain licensed the ICEE machine technology in 1965, and debuted its branded version of the slushie one year later. Slushie/Slush/Slushy: Named after snow of the same watery texture, it\u2019s like a snow cone but can be sipped through a straw. Snow cone: Similar to shave ice, it\u2019s made with a softer, more watery base atop which flavored syrups are dripped. The texture is softer because the product is served at a warmer temperature, so it is more water and less ice. Soft-serve: Ice cream with a lower fat content that is extruded out of a special machine which injects a certain amount of air into the churned mixture. That injection makes it softer and lighter than traditional ice cream. Sorbet: Sorbet or\u00a0sorbetto comes from the Arabic word\u00a0scharbat. It is a smooth, sweet, fruit-flavored frozen ice. Sprinkles: Colorful bits of candy or sugar used for decoration. Spumoni: Molded Italian ice cream with different layers, colors, flavors, and sometimes fruit bits, nuts, or syrups swirled in. It is related to the classic Neapolitan combination; layering ice cream flavors was common in Naples. Sundae: A combination of ice cream, sauce, and toppings or bases like sauce, brownie, cookies, cake, or fruit. Teaberry: Teaberries are the fruit of the wintergreen plant. Bright pink, they have a mild minty flavor, and because the plant grows wild in the Eastern U.S., it was used to flavor gum. It's also a commonly found ice cream flavor in Pennsylvania. Viennetta: A packaged and mass-produced ice cream cake, in the shape of a loaf, manufactured by Unilever that was popular in the 1990s. Its original flavor was a vanilla ice cream base with layers of chocolate. It is no longer available in the U.S., but is still available in Australia. Daniela Galarza is Eater's news editor. Dina Avila is a photographer based in Portland, Oregon. Sweets Week The Mysterious Origins of Tiramisu, the Dessert That Took the \u201880s by Storm Reports Take the Cannoli: One Pastry\u2019s Rise From Sicilian Treat to Iconic Dessert Reports Everything You Need to Know About Classic American Ice Cream Chorus Terms of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Policy GDPR Commitment Communications Preferences Contact Send Us a Tip Community Guidelines Masthead Ethics Statement Newsletters How to Pitch All Systems Operational Check out our status page for more details. Vox Media Advertise with us Jobs @ Vox Media \u00a9 2019 Vox Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved tweet share", "Data: Terminology | National Snow and Ice Data Center Skip to main content National Snow and Ice Data Center Home Data Data Sets for Research Brightness Temperature Glaciers Ice Sheets Permafrost Sea Ice Soil Moisture Snow ...search for more Scientific Data Search Support for Researchers Analysis & Imaging Tools Data Announcements Submit Your Data Data Policies User Support Data for Everyone Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Glacier Photograph Collection Greenland Ice Sheet Today MASIE (Daily sea ice extent) Satellite Observations of Arctic Change Sea Ice Index Virtual Globes: Google Earth Sponsored Programs Antarctic Glaciological Data Center Exchange for Local Observations and Knowledge of the Arctic (ELOKA) NOAA at NSIDC NASA Distributed Active Archive Center at NSIDC (NSIDC DAAC) Looking for facts and information? See About the Cryosphere. Research Scientists Research Grants Scientific Publications Informatics Research NSIDC Scientific Expeditions On Thin Ice: Expedition to a Crumbling Ice Shelf Scientists blog from Antarctica and provide a glimpse of what it's like to do research in the field. Read their blog ... News For the Media Newsroom: For the Media For Data Users Data Announcements The Drift Current Conditions Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Greenland Today Satellite Observations of Arctic Change NSIDC In the News Events NSIDC Monthly Highlights Icelights: Answers to your burning questions about ice and climate What's hot in the news around climate and sea ice and what are scientists talking about now? Read more... About About NSIDC NSIDC People Our Sponsors Jobs NSIDC Monthly Highlights Use & Copyright Contact Us Support NSIDC NSIDC's Green Data Center About the Cryosphere Quick Facts All About The Cryosphere All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Frozen Ground All About Sea Ice All About Arctic Climatology & Meteorology Snow, Ice and Climate Change Studying the Cryosphere Photo Gallery Educational Resources Cryosphere Glossary What is the Cryosphere? When scientists talk about the cryosphere, they mean the places on Earth where water is in its solid form, frozen into ice or snow. Read more ... Web pagesData Sets All About Sea Ice Introduction CharacteristicsIce formation Salinity and Brine Multiyear Ice Features Arctic vs. Antarctic ProcessesThermodynamics Dynamics EnvironmentGlobal Climate Trends Indigenous People Operations Wildlife ExplorationArctic Antarctic DataTerminology Samples StudyingField Studies Remote Sensing Modeling References and Links How to Cite Data: Terminology Sea ice is described by the area it covers, its thickness, its age, and its movement with the winds and ocean currents. The Sea Ice Index data products that NSIDC distributes provide information about several sea ice characteristics. Here, we define several key characteristics that are of interest to scientists studying sea ice. When scientists study sea ice using remote sensing data, they typically describe data in terms of gridded fields. This means the data are provided in pixels, or discrete cells, of a certain shape and size. Most of NSIDC's gridded sea ice data consist of fields of square cells that are 25.0 kilometers (15.5 miles) on a side, or covering an area of 625.0 square kilometers each (241.3 square miles). Scientists can calculate different quantities from these gridded fields. Area When we use this term, we mean the region covered by sea ice, typically given in square kilometers. For a grid cell, it is the area of the portion of the cell covered by ice. For an entire hemisphere, it is the total area covered by ice, which corresponds to sum of the area of each cell multiplied by the fractional concentration for that cell. Concentration Concentration is a unitless term that describes the relative amount of area covered by ice, compared to some reference area. Thus, concentration describes how much of a 25.0 kilometer by 25.0 kilometer (15.5 mile by 15.5 mile) box is covered by sea ice. Ice concentration typically is reported as a percentage (0 to 100 percent ice), a fraction from 0 to 1, or sometimes in tenths (0/10 to 10/10). Our Sea Ice Index products show ice concentration as a percentage. A value of 0 means there is no ice, while a value of 100 means the region is completely covered by ice. Extent Extent defines a region as either \"ice-covered\" or \"not ice-covered.\" For each data cell, it is a binary term; either the cell has ice (usually a value of \"1\") or the cell has no ice (usually a value of \"0\"). A threshold determines this labeling. A typical threshold is 15 percent, meaning that if the data cell has greater than 15 percent ice concentration, the cell is labeled as \"ice-covered.\" The Sea Ice Index products have a threshold of 15 percent. A threshold can also be as high as 30 percent. Extent is sometimes described in terms of area (in square kilometers) covered by at least some ice (above the threshold). Extent is different from the total area in that if a given region has a percentage of ice concentration greater than the threshold, the entire region is considered \"ice-covered.\" Total area tells how much of the region is actually covered by ice. Arctic- or antarctic-wide sea ice extent is always a larger number than area. Anomaly Anomaly data fields measure the difference between the sea ice value (area, extent, or concentration) at a given time and the long-term average. So an anomaly tells us how close to average the area, extent, or concentration are in a given month. Anomalies have positive values where there is more ice than average and negative values where there is less ice than average. Area and extent anomalies are reported in square kilometers, and concentration anomalies are given in percentages (-100 to +100 percent, or a fraction, -1 to +1.) The anomaly fields have the same units as their corresponding fields. For example, area and extent anomalies are in units of square kilometers, and concentration anomalies are in percents (-100 to +100) or fractions (-1 to +1). The time period for the long-term average used in the Sea Ice Index is 1981 to 2010. Thirty years is considered a standard baseline period for weather and climate, and the satellite record is now long enough to provide a thirty year baseline period. Comparisons Among Area, Concentration, and Extent The diagram and table below illustrate the definitions of area, concentration, and extent. For easier representation, each square grid cell is 8.0 kilometers (5.0 miles) on a side, for a total of 64.0 square kilometers (24.7 square miles). In A, there is no ice. In B, one fourth of the cell is covered by ice. In C, one half is covered by ice, and in D, the entire cell is covered by ice. To simplify calculations, a hypothetical threshold of 30 percent for sea ice extent is used in this example. This means that areas with less than 30 percent sea ice coverage are considered \"ice-free,\" and areas with more than 30 percent sea ice coverage are considered \"ice-covered.\" It is important to emphasize that this example is hypothetical, and in practice, thresholds are typically somewhat lower, ranging from 15 to 20 percent. Sea ice property for a 8 km2 (3 mi2) cell A B C D Ice-Covered Area 0 km2 16.0 km2 (6.2 mi2) 32.0 km2 (12.4 mi2) 64.0 km2 (24.7 mi2) Concentration (%) 0% 25% 50% 100% Concentration (fraction) 0 0.25 0.5 1.0 ExtentNo units, 30% concentration threshold 0 0 1 1 Extent30% concentration threshold 0 km2 0 km2 64.0 km2 (24.7 mi2) 64.0 km2 (24.7 mi2) Area anomaly (%)Average area is 48 km2 (18.5 mi2) -48.0 km2 (-18.5 mi2) -32.0 km2 (-12.4 mi2) -16.0 km2 (-6.2 mi2) +16.0 km2 (6.2 mi2) Concentration anomaly (%)Average concentration is 48 km2/64 km2 = 75% -75% -50% -25 % +25 % For example, one-fourth of cell B is covered by ice, so the ice-covered area is 16 square kilometers and the ice concentration is 25 percent or 0.25. The concentration value is less than the extent threshold, so the cell is designated \"not ice-covered\" with an extent value of \"0.\" The area is 32 square kilometers below average, so the area shows a negative anomaly (16 - 48 = -32 square kilometers). The concentration also shows a negative anomaly (25 - 75 = -50 percent). Learn About NSIDC Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis: Read scientific analysis on Arctic sea ice conditions. We provide an update during the first week of each month, or more frequently as conditions warrant. Icelights: Get answers to your burning questions about ice and climate. NSIDC News Science at NSIDC See Also NASA Earth Observatory Reference: Global Warming Quick Facts about Sea Ice Frequently Asked Questions about Arctic Sea Ice State of the Cryosphere: Sea Ice Find Data Search NSIDC Data NASA Earthdata Search IceBridge Portal Data Collections List Stay Current Arctic Sea Ice News and Analysis Sea Ice Index (Passive microwave satellite data) MASIE (Daily sea ice extent, multi-source) Greenland Today Newsroom Learn About Snow and Ice Icelights: Answers to Your Questions Cryosphere Quick Facts All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Sea Ice Arctic Climatology - A Primer Get Help Knowledge Base Etc. Use & Copyright Web Policy Jobs Home | Contact Us\u00a9 2019, National Snow and Ice Data Center :: Advancing knowledge of Earth's frozen regions", "(PDF) Study of the Ice-rich Syngenetic Permafrost for Road Design (Interior Alaska) | Mikhail Kanevskiy, B. Connor, and J. O'Donnell - Academia.edu Skip to main content Log InSign UpLog InSign Upmore\u00a0Job BoardAboutPressBlogPeoplePapersTermsPrivacyCopyright\u00a0We're Hiring!\u00a0Help Centerless pdfStudy of the Ice-rich Syngenetic Permafrost for Road Design (Interior Alaska)2012Mikhail KanevskiyY. ShurB. ConnorM. DillonE. StephaniJ. O'DonnellJonathan OdonnellMikhail KanevskiyY. ShurB. ConnorM. DillonE. StephaniJ. O'DonnellJonathan OdonnellDownload with GoogleDownload with Facebookor download with emailStudy of the Ice-rich Syngenetic Permafrost for Road Design (Interior Alaska)DownloadStudy of the Ice-rich Syngenetic Permafrost for Road Design (Interior Alaska)Mikhail KanevskiyY. ShurB. ConnorM. DillonE. StephaniJ. O'DonnellJonathan OdonnellMikhail KanevskiyY. ShurB. ConnorM. DillonE. StephaniJ. O'DonnellJonathan OdonnellLoading PreviewSorry, preview is currently unavailable. You can download the paper by clicking the button above.READ PAPERDownload pdf \u00d7CloseLog InLog In\u00a0with\u00a0FacebookLog In\u00a0with\u00a0GoogleorEmail:Password:Remember me on this computeror\u00a0reset passwordEnter the email address you signed up with and we'll email you a reset link. Need an account?\u00a0Click here to sign up AboutBlogPeoplePapersJob BoardAdvertise\u00a0We're Hiring!\u00a0Help CenterFind new research papers in:PhysicsChemistryBiologyHealth SciencesEcologyEarth SciencesCognitive ScienceMathematicsComputer ScienceTermsPrivacyCopyrightAcademia \u00a92019", "Permafrost Tunnel Research Facility Skip to main content (Press Enter). US Army Corps of Engineers Engineer Research and Development Center \u00ae About Director's Welcome Mission and Vision ERDC Capabilities Ongoing Research Products and Services Equipment and Facilities ERDC Fact Sheet Values\u2013The ERDC Way Leadership ERDC People in the News Client Testimonials Awards History The Engineers at Vicksburg Business With Us Contracting Small Business Technology Transfer Success Stories Patents Available for Licensing Partnering Mechanisms Cooperative Research and Development Agreements Patent License Agreements Intergovernmental Cooperative Agreements Testing Services Agreements Technical Assistance Agreements Educational Partnering Agreements International Research Office Missions Geospatial Research and Engineering Military Engineering Deployable Force Protection Demo Senior Cooperation Forum Environmental Quality and Installations Arctic \u2013 ERDC Facilitates DOD Gateway Water Resources Engineered Resilient Systems Locations CERL CHL CRREL Engineering Resources Branch EL GRL GSL ITL USACE Locations Careers Media News Stories News Releases Fact Sheets Videos Images Seminars Library Contact USACE Office Locator Home / CRREL / Permafrost Tunnel Research Facility / General Facts Installations of the Future Industry Day\u00a0 > Deadline Extended >\u00a0click for details March\u00a022, 4 p.m. Celebrating 20 years of Discovering, Developing and Delivering Menu Home Tunnel Overview Description Location Virtual Tunnel Tour Video - B-roll Tunnel Geology Soil and Rock Paleontology Permafrost General Facts Cryostructures Massive Ice Patterned Ground Climate Change Tunnel Engineering Excavation Methods Keeping the Tunnel Frozen Research Bibliography Ongoing Research Permafrost: General Facts Permafrost (n)\u2014The technical definition is soil and/or rock that has remained below 32\u00b0F for more than two years, regardless if significant amounts of ice exist or not. Collapse All\u00a0Expand All Permafrost Zones Continuous permafrost is found in very high latitude regions, where permafrost exists uninterrupted both vertically and horizontally with a few exceptions like under bodies of water. In Alaska, continuous permafrost begins generally at the latitude of the Brooks Range. Moving south from the continuous permafrost zone towards latitudes with no permafrost, there is the region of discontinuous permafrost. Discontinuous permafrost is where permafrost only exists in certain areas depending on the vegetation, soil type, moisture, and exposure to solar radiation. The percentage of permafrost coverage varies from 90% to sporadic or isolated patches. Fairbanks, Alaska, and the Permafrost Tunnel are in the discontinuous permafrost zone. Mountain or alpine permafrost exists at high altitudes in low latitude regions, where the cold mountain air temperatures can support permafrost in a region that does not have permafrost at low altitudes. Subsea permafrost exists on the continental shelves in the arctic seas. This permafrost was formed when the sea-levels were lower during large glaciations. Due to the concentration of salt in the water, which lowers the freezing point to approximately 28\u00b0F, the now higher sea levels do not thaw the permafrost. Diagram by P\u00e9w\u00e9, T.L. (1982) Geologic hazards of the Fairbanks area: Alaska Division of Geological &l Geophysical Surveys Special Report 15, 119 p. (Public Domain) Temperature Profile The diagram illustrates a simplified ground temperature profile of permafrost. As the air temperature oscillates between cold and warm, the ground temperature will reflect these temperature changes to a certain depth and with a lag in time. The minimum and maximum temperature the soil obtains forms a trumpet curve that intersects at the depth of zero amplitude, where annual temperature variations cease. The geothermal gradient is the warming that comes from the center of the earth, which is approximately 1.5\u00b0F per 100 ft. The geothermal gradient defines the curve's slope in between the depth of zero amplitude and the bottom of the permafrost. Overlying the top of permafrost, or permafrost table, is the active layer. This top portion of ground thaws during the summer and refreezes during the winter. For non-permafrost areas, the active layer is the top portion of ground that freezes during the winter and re-thaws during the summer, it is also known as the seasonal frost layer. On the diagram, the depth of the active layer is where the maximum temperature intersects the vertical 32\u00b0lF line, meaning that is the depth where the permafrost thaws to during the summer. For Fairbanks, Alaska, the typical active layer depth is 2.5 feet and the typical permafrost thickness is 150 feet, however both vary depending on the local conditions. The average permafrost temperature is about 31\u00b0F, and this is sometimes termed \"warm permafrost\" because it is very close to the thawing point. The profile diagram is simplified and exaggerated to show detail. Due to fluctuating climates, or a body of surface water, the permafrost could have an unfrozen layer or talik in between the active layer and the top of the permafrost. During a climate change event, the curve between the depth of the zero amplitude and the bottom of the permafrost could be in non-equilibrium and curved for a period of time until equilibrium readjusts by thawing or freezing of the top or bottom of the permafrost. Epigenetic Versus Syngenetic Permafrost Epigenetic permafrost is formed in soils already has been deposited by wind, water, and/or gravity through the thousands of years of geological action, and after are subjected to a colder climate causes freezing and creates permafrost. Syngenetic permafrost is the process where soil freezes and becomes permafrost occurs as the soils are being emplaced by wind, water, and/or gravity. The segregate ice and other ice features that are created at the base of the active layer can become captured and will then exist through out of the depth of the syngenetic permafrost layer. With epigenetic permafrost, the ice features will be concentrated at the top portion of the soil layer. Ice wedges, in epigenetic permafrost, will have a typical wedge shape as seen in the diagram. In syngenetic permafrost, ice wedges will have an atypical shape. With syngenetic permafrost, if the deposition is continual and without large climate change events, the ice wedge will elongate as the top of ground surface and permafrost rises. If the deposition varies with pace and/or the climate changes for a period of time, the ice wedges will look truncated and stacked, and is termed multi-stage wedges in the diagram. For example, imagine an ice wedge developing during a cold, steady depositional period, and then a climate change event happens where the ice stops growing due to warming. This event will truncate the ice wedge, and when conditions returns to cold another ice wedge will start to develop. The diagrams are exaggerated and simplified, where actual ice wedges will not look perfectly shaped as cracking does not happen in the center of the wedge every time. The tunnel primarily contains syngenetic ice wedges, where for several the type is unknown. Several ice wedges are multi-stage looking ice wedges. However, the ice wedges are truncated by a thermal erosion event that took out the tops of the ice wedges, or possibly the centers of a large continual deposition ice wedges. The top portions of the ice wedges cannot be seen within the tunnel, so it is unknown which type of syngenetic ice wedge it is. The Permafrost Tunnel contains syngenetic permafrost. Due to the syngenetic nature of the permafrost makes the tunnel a time capsule throughout the last 40,000 years. The deposition of the soils through wind and water action was very slow, and through out this time flora and fauna existed on the ground surface. Eventually the flora and fauna were buried and incorporated within the permafrost where it has been kept frozen ever since. There are many exposures of bones and plants along with ice features in the tunnel that can tell us a lot about the past climate and its changes through the last 40,000 years. Frost ActionsVirtually all of the features within permafrost are due to frost actions. As an example, segregated ice forms as the freezing front moves downward through the soil and draws water to it. The ground can become so cold causing it to contract so much that the ground will crack to relieve stress, this eventually leads to the formation ice wedges. Seasonal freezing and thawing will also create a variety of patterned ground. After the soil is completely frozen, there are very few natural processes that will continue to create features. The freezing and thawing process generally must occur to mold or shape the soil or terrain. Permafrost Thaw-Stability Coarse-grained soils, such as gravels, are non-frost-susceptible, meaning they do not form significant segregated ice and frost heave. This also means that permafrost coarse-grained soils generally do not have high percentage of ice. Because of the lack of segregated ice formation, the individual soil grains will generally remain intact with one another after the freezing process. When these soils thaw, the soil grains will have little or no distance to travel until they are in contact with each other. Therefore, the soil will have minimal settlement and keep their foundation strength. Fine-grained soils, such as silt and clays, are frost-susceptible, and meaning they form segregated ice, if water is present, and frost heave. The soil frost heaves because the forming ice lens pushes the soil grains relatively far apart, the amount of frost heave is generally dependent on the amount of water that is available. When these soils thaw, the soil grains must travel large distances to become in contact with each other again. Therefore, the soil will have large thaw settlements that are often not uniform throughout an area. In addition, the thawing soils will release the previously frozen excess water which will saturate the soil forcing it loss much of its foundation strength. However, if the fine-grained soils had no access to water when freezing, the permafrost formation will be dry and when thawed will generally have minimal settlement. References for This Page References Davis, Neil (2001) Permafrost: a guide to frozen ground in transition. Fairbanks, AK: University of Alaska Press. Kanevskiy, Mikhail, Daniel Fortier, Yuri Shur, Matthew Bray, and Torre Jorgenson (2008) Detailed cryostratigraphic studies of syngenetic permafrost in the winze of the CRREL permafrost tunnel, Fox, Alaska. In Vol. 1 of Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Permafrost: University of Alaska Fairbanks, June 29\u2013July 3, 2008, ed. D.L. Kane and K.M. Hinkel, 889\u2013894. Fairbanks, AK: Institute of Northern Engineering. P\u00e9w\u00e9, T.L. (1982) Geologic hazards of the Fairbanks area: Alaska Division of Geological & Geophysical Surveys Special Report 15, 119 p. van Everdingen, Robert, ed. 1998 revised May 2005. Multi-language glossary of permafrost and related ground-ice terms. Boulder, CO: National Snow and Ice Data Center/World Data Center for Glaciology. ESSAYONS Our Mission The mission of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is to deliver vital public and military engineering services; partnering in peace and war to strengthen our nation\u2019s security, energize the economy and reduce risks from disasters. About the Engineer Research and Development Center The official public website of the U.S. Army Engineer Research and Development Center (ERDC) AccessibilityContact UsFOIAInformation Quality ActLink DisclaimerNo Fear ActPrivacy & SecurityPublic InquiriesSite MapUSA.gov SHARPiSALUTE", "Ice wedge - Wikipedia Ice wedge From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia \u00a0\u00a0(Redirected from Frost wedge) Jump to navigation Jump to search Ice wedges in Sprengisandur, Iceland A melting pingo with surrounding ice wedge polygons near Tuktoyaktuk, Canada Ice wedge exposed by erosion along the Beaufort Sea coast, Canada. The wedge formed by thermal contraction of the ground which opened a crack in winter. The crack filled with meltwater in the spring which then froze in the permafrost, causing the thin vertical lines of ice and sediment that form the wedge itself. An ice wedge is a crack in the ground formed by a narrow or thin piece of ice that measures up to 3\u20134 meters in length at ground level and extends downwards into the ground up to several meters. During the winter months, the water in the ground freezes and expands. Once temperatures reach \u221217 degrees Celsius or lower,[citation needed] the ice that has already formed acts like a solid and expands to form cracks in the surface known as ice wedges. As this process continues over many years ice wedges can grow, up to the size of a swimming pool.[citation needed] Ice wedges usually appear in a polygonal pattern known as ice wedge polygons. The cracks can also be filled with materials other than ice, especially sand, and then they're called sand wedges. Contents 1 Formation 1.1 Thermal contraction theory 2 Forms 2.1 Active 2.2 Inactive 2.3 Casts 3 Types 3.1 Epigenetic 3.2 Syngenetic 3.3 Anti-Syngenetic 4 References Formation[edit] There are many theories that attempt to explain the origin of ice wedges but only one has been consistently supported by most prominent scientists: the thermal contraction theory. Thermal contraction theory[edit] The thermal contraction theory states that during the winter months, thermal contraction cracks form only a few cm wide and a couple of metres deep because of the extreme cold weather.[1] Over the next few months, the snow melts and the remaining water fills the cracks and the permafrost below the surface freezes it. These tiny cracks turn into permafrost. Once the summer months arrive, the permafrost expands; horizontal compression produces upturning of the frozen sediment by plastic deformation. The next winter the cold refreezes and cracks the already forming ice wedge, opening a way for the melting snow of spring to fill the empty crack. The mean annual air temperature thought needed to form ice wedges is \u22126\u00b0 to \u22128\u00b0C or colder.[2] Forms[edit] There are three different forms of ice wedges: active, inactive and casts. All three forms are prevalent today and can be found in different parts of the world. Active[edit] Active ice wedges are those that are still evolving and growing. During each year, a layer of ice will be added if cracking occurs, but cracking need not occur every year to be considered active. The area in which most ice wedges remain active is along the permafrost zone. The number of active ice wedges that are cracking yearly is consistently declining as they become inactive.[3] Inactive[edit] Inactive ice wedges are wedges that are no longer cracking and growing. Throughout the winter months, the wedge does not split and therefore in the summer no new water is added.[3] Casts[edit] In areas of past permafrost, ice wedges have melted and are no longer filled with ice. The wedge, which is now empty, is filled with sediment and dirt from the surrounding walls. These are called ice wedge casts and are used to estimate the climate of hundreds of thousands of years ago. Types[edit] Ice wedges have historically been classified into two main categories: epigenetic and syngenetic[4]. The type of an ice wedges refer to the way in which the wedge grows over time. Relatively recent field studies have revealed a new type of ice wedge: anti-syngenetic. Currently, these are the only three distinctly classified types of ice wedges observed in nature[5]. The differences among the growth patterns of epigenetic, syngenetic and anti-syngenetic wedges then depend upon ground surface conditions, i.e. whether the ground level remains essentially unchanged or whether there is addition or loss of material[4]. Epigenetic[edit] \u2018Epigenetic\u2019 in geological terms refers to geological features that formed after the formation of the surrounding materials. In relation to ice wedges, this means that epigenetic ice wedges are found to form in preexisting permafrost, and are not formed at the same time as the permafrost meaning they are much younger than the surrounding material. An ice wedge being epigenetic also refers to the fashion in which they grow. These types of ice wedges grow considerably wider over their lifetime, but rarely any deeper or taller. This means that epigenetic ice wedges can grow to at most 3-5 meters in width, but stay roughly the same depth/height as when they had formed[6]. Typically, the sediments on either side of an epigenetic ice wedge, adjacent to the edges of the wedge exhibit upward bending. In an epigenetic ice wedge, the age of the ice on the periphery changes little from top to bottom. Syngenetic[edit] Syngenetic ice wedges, like the epigenetic variety, find their roots in the geological term syngenetic, which means forming at the same time as the surrounding material[6]. This is because syngenetic ice wedges grow as the upper permafrost surface rises in response to the addition of material on the ground surface[4]. This allows syngenetic ice wedges to grow very deep, as the surface around them rises with the accumulation of alluvium (in floodplains), peat (in tundra), and gelifluction deposits (at the bottom of a slope), among other materials[4]. Syngenetic ice wedges may only form if the thermal contraction and subsequent ice-veinlet growth can keep pace with the addition of new material. If this is the case, the ice wedge can reach depths of 25 meters, but the average is much less[6]. In a syngenetic ice wedge, the age of the ice on the periphery decreases upwards. Anti-Syngenetic[edit] Anti-syngenetic ice wedge were first observed in 1990 during the fieldwork of J. Ross Mackay. Mackay found that anti-syngenetic grew in conditions opposite to those of syngenetic ice wedges in that the anti-syngenetic variety required the removal of material instead of the accumulation and addition of material[4]. Anti-syngenetic ice wedges only form on slopes, where there is a net loss of materials erosion. Similar to syngenetic ice wedges, anti-syngenetic ice wedges can only occur if the rate of thermal contraction cracking and ice-veinlet growth keeps pace with the removal of active material[4]. Anti-syngenetic ice wedges therefore only grow downwards, penetrating deeper into the soil only as the upper layers are removed by mass wasting and erosion[4]. In an anti-syngenetic ice wedge, the age of the ice on the periphery increases upwards. References[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ice wedges. ^ \"Ice wedges, polygons and pingos\". Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service - Alaska. 2006-02-14. Archived from the original on 2008-05-18. Retrieved 2008-05-26. ^ \"Permafrost: Origins\". Britannica Online Encyclopedia. Retrieved 2008-05-26. ^ a b \"Permafrost: Active wedges, inactive wedges, and ice-wedge casts\". Britannica Online Encyclopedia. Retrieved 2008-05-26. ^ a b c d e f g Mackay, J. Ross (1990). \"Some observations on the growth and deformation of epigenetic, syngenetic and anti-syngenetic ice wedges\". Permafrost and Periglacoal Processes. 1: 15\u201329 \u2013 via Wiley. ^ Hariprasad C. (2011) Epigenetic Ice. In: Singh V.P., Singh P., Haritashya U.K. (eds) Encyclopedia of Snow, Ice and Glaciers. Encyclopedia of Earth Sciences Series. Springer, Dordrecht ^ a b c Subcommittee, P., 1988. Glossary of permafrost and related ground-ice terms. Associate Committee on Geotechnical Research, National Research Council of Canada, Ottawa, 156. vtePeriglacial environmentLandforms Blockfield Bratschen Cryoplanation terrace Glacial erratic Paha Palsa Periglacial lake Pingo Protalus rampart Rock glacier Strandflat Glaciokarst Thermokarst Patterned ground Frost boil Polygons Solifluction lobes and sheets Sorted stripe Stone ring Processes Cryoplanation Cryosuction Cryoturbation Fluvio-thermal erosion Frost heave Frost weathering Gelifluction Ice segregation Methane release Nivation Solifluction Syngenetic permafrost growth Zero-curtain effect Soils and deposits Active layer Gelisols Ice wedge Loess Peat Permafrost Stratified slope deposit Talik Yedoma Biomes and ecotones Arctic tundra Arctic tree line Antarctic oasis Antarctic tundra Montane grasslands and shrublands Alpine tundra Alpine tree line (Massenerhebung effect) Taiga (Drunken trees) Climate Alpine Polar Subpolar Category:Periglacial landforms Template:Glaciers Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ice_wedge&oldid=865143178\" Categories: Periglacial landformsPatterned groundsPermafrostHidden categories: All articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from March 2012Articles with unsourced statements from May 2008Commons category link is on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces ArticleTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages DeutschEspa\u00f1olFran\u00e7aisItalianoNederlandsNorskPolskiSvenska Edit links This page was last edited on 22 October 2018, at 01:20\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "An Error Occurred Setting Your User Cookie An Error Occurred Setting Your User Cookie This site uses cookies to improve performance. If your browser does not accept cookies, you cannot view this site. Setting Your Browser to Accept Cookies There are many reasons why a cookie could not be set correctly. Below are the most common reasons: You have cookies disabled in your browser. You need to reset your browser to accept cookies or to ask you if you want to accept cookies. Your browser asks you whether you want to accept cookies and you declined. To accept cookies from this site, use the Back button and accept the cookie. Your browser does not support cookies. Try a different browser if you suspect this. The date on your computer is in the past. If your computer's clock shows a date before 1 Jan 1970, the browser will automatically forget the cookie. To fix this, set the correct time and date on your computer. You have installed an application that monitors or blocks cookies from being set. You must disable the application while logging in or check with your system administrator. Why Does this Site Require Cookies? This site uses cookies to improve performance by remembering that you are logged in when you go from page to page. To provide access without cookies would require the site to create a new session for every page you visit, which slows the system down to an unacceptable level. What Gets Stored in a Cookie? This site stores nothing other than an automatically generated session ID in the cookie; no other information is captured. In general, only the information that you provide, or the choices you make while visiting a web site, can be stored in a cookie. For example, the site cannot determine your email name unless you choose to type it. Allowing a website to create a cookie does not give that or any other site access to the rest of your computer, and only the site that created the cookie can read it.", "List of ice hockey terminology | Ice Hockey Wiki | FANDOM powered by Wikia FANDOM Games Movies TV Video Wikis Explore Wikis Community Central Start a Wiki Search Sign In Don't have an account? Register Start a Wiki Advertisement Ice Hockey Wiki 61,254 Pages Add new page Top Content most_popular Most visited Seventh Player Award List of NHL records (team) List of Ice Hockey Players of Asian Descent List of OHA Junior C Seasons List of ice hockey terminology List of NHL players with 1000 points List of NHL players with 100-point seasons highest_ratings Newly changed Manitoba Senior AAA Saskatchewan Prairie Senior Hockey League North Central Hockey League (Alberta) 2019 Allan Cup 2018-19 Atlantic Hockey Season Vaudreuil Titans 2018-19 OSAHL Season Community Featured users HockeyAl Dtalbot MarchandTriedToLickMe Kyvuh Community portal Forum Recent blog posts Explore Wiki Activity Random page Community Videos Images in: Terminology List of ice hockey terminology View source History Talk (0) Share This is a list of common terminology and slang used in ice hockey along with explanations of their meanings. For other terms and an understanding of ice hockey, refer to ice hockey. Contents: 0\u20139 A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Top\u00a0of\u00a0Page \u2014 See\u00a0also 0-9 2-man advantage\u00a0 See five on three. 2-on-1\u00a0 See odd man rush 3-on-2\u00a0 See odd man rush. 500\u00a0 (also known as .500) 50% or even, usually referring to a team's overall record when their number of wins equals their number of regulation losses. 5-on-3\u00a0 See five on three. 5-on-5\u00a0 See full strength. A Attacking zone\u00a0 The opposing team's end of the ice, as determined by the blue line. Apple\u00a0 Another term for assist. B Backhander or Backhand shot A shot that is taken from the backside of the blade. Backchecking Rushing back to the defensive zone in response to an opposing team's attack. Backdoor The unprotected side of the goal when the goaltender is protecting one side. Backstop A goaltender. Bar down A shot that hits the crossbar and then proceeds down into the net for a goal. Bender A person who is bad at skating or hockey in general, thus resulting in the bending of ankles. Bird cage The cage on the helmet. Biscuit The puck. Biscuit in the basket Scoring a goal. Blocker The rectangular pad that a goaltender wears on the stick-holding hand. (See waffle pad.) Blowing a tire When a player that is skating falls down for no apparent reason. Blue line The lines separating the attack/defense zones from the neutral zone. Blueliner A defenseman. Boarding Checking a player from behind into the boards. Body checking Using the hip or body to knock an opponent against the boards or to the ice (also known as hip checking). Boobirds Obnoxious fans who boo the home team or a player when they are playing poorly, or they boo an ex-player who returns to the rink. Bottle Rocket The event in which a goal is scored and the goaltender's water bottle, which is placed on top of the net during play, is propelled into the air by the puck striking it from underneath. When this happens, the shot is almost always from a very steep angle, close to the net. The box see Penalty box Breakaway When a player has possession of the puck and there are no defenders other than the goalie between him and the opposing goal. Butterfly A style of goaltending wherein the goalie tends to cover the lower half of the net with his or her leg pads. Breezers your mom. Bucket A helmet. Bundled A player being checked hard. C Cage\u00a0 Metal grid that attaches to the front of a helmet to protect the face. Cannonading Drive\u00a0 A very hard slap-shot taken from the point. Catcher or Catch glove\u00a0 The webbed glove that the goaltender wears on the hand opposite the stick. (Also known as the trapper.) Centre (or center)\u00a0 A forward position whose primary zone of play is the middle of the ice. Change on the fly\u00a0 Substituting a player from the bench while the game clock is running. Cherry picking\u00a0 When a player stays near their opponent's defensive zone waiting for an outlet pass in order to receive a breakaway. Chippy\u00a0 Using, or characterized by, aggressive, rough play or commission of fouls (e.g., \"a chippy player,\" \"a chippy second period\"). Coast to coast\u00a0 A solo scoring chance originating in the player's own defensive zone. Coincidental penalties\u00a0 When both teams are assessed an equal amount of penalties at the same time, usually on the same play or incident. Contract year\u00a0 The last year of a multi-year contract. Cookie jar\u00a0 Top section of the net (e.g., \"Put that biscuit right in the cookie jar!\"). Also see \"top shelf\". Crashing the net\u00a0 Players head with full steam to the front of the net, into the goalie's space and/or straight into the goalie. Also known as crashing the crease. Crease\u00a0 The blue ice in front of each net. Cross-checking\u00a0 The act of checking an opponent with the shaft of the stick held in both hands. This is illegal and earns a minor or major penalty depending on the severity of the infraction. D D to D\u00a0 A pass from one defenseman to another defenseman, both on the same team. Dangle\u00a0 See Deke. Dangler\u00a0 A player who has exceptionally good stick handling abilities and can easily fool opposing players. Defensive zone\u00a0 The defending team's zone as determined by the blue line. Deke\u00a0 When a player handles the puck or himself in such a manner to fool the opponent into moving out of position, allowing the player to get past. Originated from the word decoy. Delay of game\u00a0 Deliberately causing a stoppage of play; player is penalized with a minor penalty. Delayed offside\u00a0 If a player enters the attacking zone ahead of the puck but does not touch it, the play is offside but no whistle is blown immediately, thus creating a delayed offside. When all players from the offside team leave their offensive zone and go into the neutral zone the linesman cancels the offside infraction. Conversely, if the offending team touches the puck before leaving their offensive zone the whistle is blown for the offside infraction. Delayed penalty\u00a0 When a penalty is called, the referee will raise his or her arm to indicate that one is being called, but if the team who committed the infraction is not in control of the puck, no whistle will be blown until a player from the offending team controls the puck. Delayed whistle\u00a0An official waits to blow his whistle, usually due to a delayed offside or delayed penalty call. Dirty\u00a0 Physical play in hockey, typically consisting of disallowed techniques such as elbowing, high-sticking, cross-checking, and/or fighting. Dipsy Doodle\u00a0 A fancy deke which fools the opponent, allowing the puck handler to sneak past 'in style'. Dive\u00a0 When a player embellishes contact made against him in order to entice the referee into calling a penalty against the opposition; however sometimes this ends up in a \"unsportsmanlike conduct\" penalty being called against the embellishing player. Donkey Kong\u00a0 When a goaltender is on his stomach and the shot is going over the goaltender's body, the goaltender bends both legs up to try to block the puck in mid air and from going into the net (usually used in the most desperate situations). Drop pass\u00a0 When a player passes the puck behind himself to a teammate. Dropping the mitts\u00a0 See fisticuffs. Dummied\u00a0 When a player is hit hard and lays on the ice without moving for at least 3 seconds. Dump and chase\u00a0 An offensive strategy used to get the puck over the opposing team's blue line and into the corners where players can race to get it, thereby moving the play into the attacking zone. E Empty net goal\u00a0 A goal scored when the opposing goalie is not on the ice. Enforcer\u00a0 A player quick to fight who defends his teammates against violent members of the other team. Extra attacker\u00a0 A player who has been substituted for the team's goaltender on the ice. F Faceoff\u00a0 The method used to begin play at the beginning of a period or after a stoppage of play. The two teams line up in opposition to each other. One player from each team attempts to gain control of the puck after it is dropped by an official between their sticks onto a \"face-off spot\" on the ice . Face wash\u00a0 When a player rubs his hockey glove over the face of an opponent. Fan\u00a0 When a player misses the puck when attempting to play or shoot it. Filthy\u00a0 Something that is unreal or referring to an amazing play or style Fisticuffs\u00a0 A fight. Five on three\u00a0 Five on three (also called two-man advantage) is when one team has had two players sent to the penalty box. This leaves the opponent with five skaters (i.e., not including the goaltender) to penalized team's three. The team with the advantage has a very good chance of scoring during this period of play. Five on five\u00a0 See full strength. Five-hole\u00a0 The gap between a goaltender's legs. Flop\u00a0 When the tongue of the skate is bent, 90 degrees or more, at the ankle, i.e. Sean Avery has the filthiest flop in the show. Flow\u00a0 The swift act of dangling on the rush, or a player's hair coming out of the back of their helmet, i.e. Jaromir Jagr's got some filthy flow. Forechecking\u00a0 Checking in the offensive zone in order to gain control of the puck and set up a scoring opportunity. Freezing the puck\u00a0 The act of trapping the puck so it cannot be played. Full strength\u00a0 Full strength (also called 5-on-5) refers to when both teams have five skaters and one goaltender on the ice. G Gate\u00a0 See penalty box. Garbage goal\u00a0 A goal that takes little talent to score. Most such goals are scored from right in front of the net, often when the goaltender is out of position. Goal\u00a0 A goal is scored when a puck completely crosses the goal line within the goal frame. Goal line\u00a0 The line that the puck must completely cross in order to be considered a goal. Goon\u00a0 See Enforcer (usually refers to an enforcer that plays for the other team). Gong Show\u00a0 1) A player that usually is above the average size and thinks he is the best player out on the ice, but really is awful (refer to bender). 2) A game that devolves into a series a fights and altercations, often with numerous players being thrown out of the game. Gordie Howe hat trick\u00a0 A Gordie Howe hat trick is when one player scores a goal, notches an assist and gets into a fight all in the same game (a natural Gordie Howe hat trick occurs when a player does all three in one period, however many playersWho? see this as ostentatious and it can be frowned upon in some hockey circles). Greasy\u00a0 As in a 'greasy goal' or a 'greasy win' that is not pretty, but gets the job done through hard work. Gretzky's office\u00a0 The area behind the net, made known by Wayne Gretzky for his ability to set up and score goals from there. Grinder\u00a0 Hockey grinder H Hand pass\u00a0 The act of passing the puck using one's hand. This is legal inside a team's defensive zone, but illegal in the neutral zone and attacking zone, even if the pass originates from another zone. Hash marks\u00a0 The straight lines from the faceoff circles in front of both nets. Used to line up faceoffs. Haymaker\u00a0 A fighting fist swing coined from hockey fights, where you swing your fist in a wide arc starting behind you and coming wide around with a straight arm to catch the opponent from the side. Hat-trick\u00a0 When one player scores three goals in one game. High stick\u00a0 The act of hitting a player in the head or shoulders with a stick. Also the act of hitting the puck in the air above the height of the top goal pipe (4'). Hip checking\u00a0 Using the hip to knock an opponent against the boards or to the ice. Home-ice advantage\u00a0 The ability to make the last line change. Hockey bag\u00a0 a duffel bag for hockey equipment. Hooking\u00a0 Using a stick to hold or slow down a player (illegal). Howitzer\u00a0 A very fast slap shot. Hoser\u00a0 In pre-Zamboni days, the losing team had to hose the ice down with water. I Icing\u00a0 Icing occurs when a player shoots the puck across both the center red line and the opposing team's goal line without the puck going into the net or being able to be touched by an opposing player in their neutral or defensive zones. If an offensive player touches the puck first after it crosses both the red line and the goal line, icing is negated. When icing occurs, a linesman stops play. Play is resumed with a faceoff in the defending zone of the team that committed the infraction (with the team that committed the infraction being unable to make a line change during the stoppage). J Jill\u00a0 See jock. Jock\u00a0 A jock (or for females, a jill) are simple devices used to protect the genitalia of an ice hockey player. Jersey, Jersied, Jerseying\u00a0 In a hockey fight, pulling the opponent jersey over their head so they are stuck inside the jersey while you continue to fight. Jibbs\u00a0 the teeth L Laser\u00a0 A hard, accurate shot. Laying on the lumber See Slashing. Left wing\u00a0 See Winger. Left wing lock\u00a0 The left wing lock is a defensive ice hockey strategy similar to the neutral zone trap. In the most basic form, once puck possession changes, the left wing moves back in line with the defensemen. Each defender (including the left winger) play a zone defense and are responsible for a third of the ice each. Since there are normally only two defensemen, this tactic helps to avoid odd man rushes. Light the lamp\u00a0 Scoring a goal. Line brawl\u00a0 A series of fights involving most, or all, players on the ice at the same time. Long change\u00a0 In the second period, the goaltenders change ends, meaning that the players' bench is closer to the offensive zone rather than the defensive zone. The \"long change\" can be a factor when a tired line is stuck in the defensive zone and cannot come off due to the increased distance to the bench. Long side\u00a0 The side of the goal furthest from the shooter. M Man advantage\u00a0 When one team is penalized, and one of its players sent to the penalty box, the second team maintains a man advantage for the duration of the penalty (Major penalty) or until a goal is scored (Minor penalty). If two penalties are called on one team there will be a two man advantage. If more than two penalties are called on one team the man advantage is limited to two men. Man on A warning from teammates to a player that an opposing player (that he may be unaware of) is near him. Usually given in loose puck situations. Murphy dump\u00a0 The technique of clearing the puck out of the defensive zone by lifting it high above the oppositions heads, with it dropping before reaching the opposing goal line. (popularized by Larry Murphy while with the Pittsburgh Penguins.) N Natural hat-trick\u00a0 A player scores three goals in a row without any player from either team scoring in between them, also when three goals are scored by one player in one period. Neutral zone trap\u00a0 A defensive strategy focused on preventing the opposing team from proceeding with the puck through the neutral zone (the area between both blue lines) and attempting to take the puck from the opposing team. O Odd man rush\u00a0 When a team enters the attacking zone and outnumbers the opposing players in the zone. Offensive zone\u00a0 See Attack zone. One timer\u00a0 The act of shooting the puck directly off a pass without playing the puck in any way. P Paddle\u00a0 The wide portion above the blade of a goalie's stick. Penalty box The area where a player sits to serve the time of a given penalty, for an offense not severe enough to merit outright expulsion from the contest (sometimes called the sin bin or bin). Playmaker\u00a0 A fast player who usually scores more assists than goals. A Playmaker has the speed and balance to make plays, and frequently relies on a sniper to finish them. (e.g. Joe Thornton) Playoff beard\u00a0 The superstitious practice of a hockey player not shaving off his facial hair during the playoffs, consequently growing a beard. Plus-minus\u00a0 A hockey statistic that can apply to a player or an offensive or defensive line indicating whether they were on the ice when the opposing team scored (a minus) or on the ice when their team scored (a plus). The point\u00a0 A player in the opponent's end zone at the junction of the blue line with the boards is said to be at the point. Poke checking\u00a0 Using the stick to poke the puck away from an opponent. Pond hockey\u00a0 A form of outdoor hockey similar to shinny. A fan might state that their team 'looks like they're playing pond hockey' if the players are not displaying the heart or concentration upon the game that their elite professional level demands. Power forward\u00a0 A power forward is a large, muscular offensive player (6'0\" - 6'5\", 210 to 240 pounds), with the mobility to track a puck to the corners of the rink, the physical toughness required to dig it out, and the puck-handling skills to get it back to anyone in front of the net. Powerplay\u00a0 A powerplay occurs when one team has more players on the ice than the other team as a result of penalties assessed to the shorthanded team. Pull the goalie\u00a0 Removing the goalie from the ice in order to temporarily replace him with an extra skater (attacker). This usually occurs in the final minutes of the game when a team is behind by 1 or 2 goals and can be surprisingly effective for a last ditch effort. Q Quick whistle A stoppage in play that occasionally occurs when an on-ice official view of the puck is obstructed while the puck is still moving or playable but the official stops the play with a whistle. The most common example of this is a goaltender appearing to have trapped the puck underneath his catcher, yet the puck is still freely moving and within legal striking distance of the opposing players. The official will whistle the play \"dead\" with the puck still visible to others. This often draws an unfavorable reaction from hometown crowds when the whistle negates a perceived scoring chance for the home team. R Rearguard\u00a0 A defenseman. Rebound\u00a0 A rebound occurs when the puck bounces off a goalie, a player, or the net (or occasionally, the back boards) after a shot on goal. Referee's crease\u00a0 The semi-circular area at the red line along the scorer's bench into which a player may not follow a referee. Ringing the pipe\u00a0 A hard shot that squarely hits the goal post or crossbar and makes a ringing sounds. Note; this is not scored as a shot on goal. Rink rat A pond hockey or shinny player that always seems to be around to play in a pick-up game. Also, a father of a youth hockey player who always attends every game, even if it's not his own son's. Is often known well by both the players and parents. Right wing\u00a0 See Winger. Ripple the twine\u00a0 Scoring a goal. Rocked Big hit. Roofie Shooting high on a goalie that always drops to his pads; shooting for the \"roof\" of the net. Roughing\u00a0 Penalty for aggressively interfering with another player (punch, unnecessary hits etc.) S Sauce\u00a0 The amount of force put into a shot or pass (e.g., \"I put a lot of sauce on that pass, didn't think you would get it!\" or \"Shoulda put more sauce on that one...). Reference is usually to hot sauce, or mustard, being that they both pack a punch. Saucer pass\u00a0 An airborne pass from one player to another. It is called a saucer pass because the puck resembles a flying saucer in mid air. Saucer\u00a0 A saucer pass. Screened shot\u00a0 A shot that the goaltender cannot see due to other players obscuring it. Shadow\u00a0 When a player is assigned to 'shadow' or follow a player (usually of exceptional skill) to hamper their impact upon the game. Shaft\u00a0 The long part of the stick that is straight and is held by the player. Shorthanded\u00a0 A team is said to be shorthanded when they have fewer players on the ice than the opposing team as a result of penalties. Shortside\u00a0 The side of the goal closest to the shooter. Shot on goal\u00a0 A shot that will enter the goal if it is not stopped by the goaltender. A shot on goal must result in either a goal or a save (shots that hit the main pipes of the goal are not counted as shots). Show\u00a0 Term for the pros/NHL. Shuffle the muffin\u00a0 See deke. Shutdown\u00a0 A defensive play that stops an offensive play. Shutdown player A player skilled at defensive play. Shutdown pair Two forwards or defensemen working together, fundamentally to stop the opposing teams offense players. Sin bin\u00a0 The penalty box.; Sieve\u00a0 Refers to a goalie who allows a lot of goals. Slapshot\u00a0 A slapshot is a hard shot, usually with a big wind up, wherein the player bends his stick on the ice and allows the energy stored in bending the stick to launch the puck forward. Slashing\u00a0 Striking an opponent's arms or lower body with the hockey stick. Usually a penalty is incurred. Slew foot Sweeping or kicking out a player's skate or tripping them from behind, causing them to fall backwards. Slot\u00a0 Slot is the area on the hockey rink directly in front of the goaltender between the face-off circles on each side. Slow whistle\u00a0 When an official is slow to blow his whistle compared to when the whistle would be blown under similar circumstances. Snap shot\u00a0 A snap shot is a like an abbreviated slap shot. The purpose of the snap shot is to combine the main advantages of the wrist shot (shot accuracy and quick delivery) and the slap shot (puck speed). The stick should start at your hip when shooting. Sniper\u00a0 A player with a powerful, accurate shot skilled at finishing plays. Snipers frequently score more goals than assists. Snipers can be either forwards or defensemen. Spin-o-rama\u00a0 A phrase coined by sportscaster Danny Gallivan to describe a player completing several tight circles with the puck fully under control of his stick, eluding pursuing opponents who cannot keep up or intercept the player. Split the D\u00a0 When an offensive player confuses or out maneuvers two defensemen in order to get between them. Stack the pads\u00a0 A save wherein the goaltender drops to one side and makes the save with his leg pads. Stands on his head\u00a0 When the goaltender makes many spectacular saves, usually resulting in a win for his team. Stay-at-home defenseman\u00a0 A defenseman who plays very defensively. He doesn't skate with the puck toward the offensive zone very often but will look to pass first. Usually the last player to leave his defensive zone. Stick checking\u00a0 Using the stick to interfere with an opponent's stick. Stickhandling\u00a0 The act of controlling the puck with one's stick, especially while maneuvering through opponents. Stoned\u00a0 A goalkeeper makes a great save and the shooter is \"stoned\". Stripes\u00a0 Referees. Style\u00a0 Refers to whether the player has a good setup of equipment. For example \"Man you got some dirty style going on\".\u00a0; Sweep checking\u00a0: Using the stick in a sweeping motion to knock the puck away from an opponent or deter him from passing. Sunburn\u00a0 When the red goal indicator light lights up a lot behind a goalie, he gets sunburned. T T-bar\u00a0 The front, top bar on the frame of a hockey net, running perpendicular to the posts. Tilly\u00a0 A fight. See \"Fisticuffs\" Toe drag\u00a0 Dragging the puck along the ice with the end (toe) of the stick blade on the ice as opposed to pushing with the bottom edge. Top ched\u00a0 See \"Top Shelf\" Top shelf\u00a0 The top section of the net. The trap\u00a0 Also called the \"neutral zone trap\", is a defensive-style hockey strategy in which a team loads up the neutral zone with players so that the opposing team has a difficult time crossing the blue line and gaining the zone. It is considered to be very boring to watch. Trapezoid\u00a0 In the NHL, the trapezoidal area behind the goal line and net where the goaltender may touch the puck. A minor penalty (delay of game) is assessed if the goaltender plays the puck behind the goal line outside of the trapezoid. Trapper\u00a0 See Catch glove. Trolley tracks\u00a0 Coined by Don Cherry, the trolley tracks are two 'lanes' in the neutral zone, located midway between the center face-off dot and the boards, spanning from blue-line to blue-line. They are named this due to the common occurrence of a forward receiving a pass from his defense-man during breakout, and then getting completely demolished by an opposing player, usually because they are still looking back at where the pass had originated. This pass is often referred to as a suicide pass. It can be blamed on either the defense-man for setting up such an obvious pass, or the player receiving the pass for not keeping their head up. Twig A player's stick. Two-way forward A forward who handles the defensive aspects of the game as well as the offensive aspects.. U Undressing The act of the puck carrier displaying exceptional skill in out-maneuvering the defender, usually in a 1 on 1 situation with the last defender. \"He undresses the defenseman and walks in on goal!\" V Video goal judge An off-ice official who reviews a goal by video instant replay. W Waffle\u00a0 The goalie's blocker. This term stemmed from the visual appearance of the blocker in the pre-modern ice hockey equipment era (also refer to waffle-boarding). Waffle-boarding A quick save with the goalie's blocker, usually a sideways-sweeping motion. Play-by-play announcer Mike Emrick often uses the term in his broadcasts. Wagon A washed up, typically post 20's player. Past their prime but haven't hung up the skates yet. Wheel\u00a0 Typically referred to when there is time and space to skate with the puck, sometimes is said to tell someone to skate faster. Wheeling\u00a0 The act of trying to pursue girls outside the hockey rink. Wheels\u00a0 A player's skates. Whole Sale\u00a0When every single player from a team changes on the fly (except the goalie). Also could be used with just one single offensive line changing. Winger\u00a0 A winger is a forward position of a player whose primary zone of play on the ice is along the outer playing area. A right winger is responsible for the right-hand side of the ice and a left winger is responsible for the left-hand side. Wrap around\u00a0 Scoring from behind the net. Wrist shot\u00a0 A type of shot that involves using arm muscles (especially those in the wrist and forearm) to propel a puck forward from the open-faced, concave part of the blade of a hockey stick. X Y Yard sale\u00a0 When a player gets knocked to the ice and loses a piece of his equipment; or when a team wins an important game and throws their hockey gloves/sticks/helmets all about the ice. Z Zamboni\u00a0 See ice resurfacer. Zone\u00a0 One of three zones on the ice, the offensive zone, the neutral zone and the defensive zone. Zebra See referee. See also Ice hockey statistics This page uses content from Wikipedia. The original article was at List of ice hockey terminology. The list of authors can be seen in the page history. As with Ice Hockey Wiki, the text of Wikipedia is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-Share Alike License 3.0 (Unported) (CC-BY-SA). Retrieved from \"https://icehockey.fandom.com/wiki/List_of_ice_hockey_terminology?oldid=415841\" Categories: Terminology Fan Feed More Ice Hockey Wiki 1 Seventh Player Award 2 Manitoba Junior Hockey League Explore Wikis Attack on Titan Wiki BoJack Horseman Wiki American Horror Story Wiki Explore Games Movies TV Wikis Follow Us Overview About Careers Press Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Global Sitemap Local Sitemap Community Community Central Support Fan Contributor Program WAM Score Help Can't find a community you love? Create your own and start something epic. Start a wiki The FANDOM App Take your favorite fandoms with you and never miss a beat Advertise Media Kit Contact Ice Hockey Wiki is a FANDOM Lifestyle Community. View Mobile Site Capt. Marvel Hulk Thor", "Talik - Wikipedia Talik From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search For other uses, see Talik (disambiguation). A talik is a layer of year-round unfrozen ground that lies in permafrost areas. In regions of continuous permafrost, taliks often occur underneath shallow thermokarst lakes and rivers, where the deep water does not freeze in winter, and thus the soil underneath will not freeze either. Sometimes closed, open and through talik are distinguished. These terms refer to whether the talik is completely surrounded by permafrost, is open to the top (e.g. a thermokarst lake), or open to both top and unfrozen layers beneath the permafrost, respectively. Supra-permafrost taliks[edit] Due to climate fluctuation or change, some permafrost regions may develop an unfrozen layer between the seasonally thawing/freezing active layer and the permafrost. The layer is called supra-permafrost (above the permafrost) talik; it is different from traditional taliks, which are usually associated with water bodies, in that supra-permafrost talik occurs because the ground that thawed in the summer does not completely refreeze in the winter. Calculations show that climate warming would induce supra-permafrost taliks in intermediately cold regions (in very cold regions, warming simply induces a deeper summer thaw without forming the talik layer; while in warm, shallow permafrost regions, permafrost quickly disappears). This type of taliks has recently been observed in Russia. With time and continued increase in air temperature or snow depth, this talik layer will become thicker and thicker and the deep permafrost layer would eventually disappear. Findings from a scientific study suggest occurrence of open taliks within areas of fault zones and those influenced by large rivers.[1] See also[edit] Frost heaving Palsa Pingo References[edit] ^ D Nicolsky and N Shakhova (25 March 2010), Modeling sub-sea permafrost in the East Siberian Arctic Shelf: the Dmitry Laptev Strait, IOP Science vtePeriglacial environmentLandforms Blockfield Bratschen Cryoplanation terrace Glacial erratic Paha Palsa Periglacial lake Pingo Protalus rampart Rock glacier Strandflat Glaciokarst Thermokarst Patterned ground Frost boil Polygons Solifluction lobes and sheets Sorted stripe Stone ring Processes Cryoplanation Cryosuction Cryoturbation Fluvio-thermal erosion Frost heave Frost weathering Gelifluction Ice segregation Methane release Nivation Solifluction Syngenetic permafrost growth Zero-curtain effect Soils and deposits Active layer Gelisols Ice wedge Loess Peat Permafrost Stratified slope deposit Talik Yedoma Biomes and ecotones Arctic tundra Arctic tree line Antarctic oasis Antarctic tundra Montane grasslands and shrublands Alpine tundra Alpine tree line (Massenerhebung effect) Taiga (Drunken trees) Climate Alpine Polar Subpolar Category:Periglacial landforms Template:Glaciers Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Talik&oldid=677996874\" Categories: Physical geographyTypes of soilArctic geography terminologyPermafrost Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces ArticleTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version Languages \u0627\u0644\u0639\u0631\u0628\u064a\u0629DeutschFran\u00e7aisItalianoPolski\u0420\u0443\u0441\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439\u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0441\u044c\u043a\u0430 Edit links This page was last edited on 26 August 2015, at 20:23\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "EUCOP (Jun 2014), European Conference on Permafrost, \u00c9vora Portugal - Conference Trade Shows Conferences Top 100 Venues Login Add Event Promote Event Download App ConferenceEuropean Conference on Permafrost 18-21 Jun 2014 ( notify new dates ) Cathedral of \u00c9vora, \u00c9vora, Portugal Interested Request a Booth Share About Reviews The European Conference on Permafrost, organized by the Abreu will take place from 18th June to the 21st June 2014 in Aveiro, Portugal. The conference will cover areas like Challenges of permafrost predictive modeling under a changing climate, Recent advances on Antarctic Permafrost and Soils, New Developments on Permafrost Geophysics, History of Permafrost Research, Education and Outreach, Open session on Permafrost, Periglacial Geomorphology, Permafrost and mountain microbiology from .. continue reading microbial function, adaptation and activity to environmental impacts, Biogeochemistry of Permafrost in Transition, Topography and microclimate effects on permafrost and seasonally frozen ground, From kinematics to dynamics, geomorphic and physical controls of permafrost creep, Limnological processes in permafrost environments, Dynamics of ice wedge polygons and thermokarst in tundra landscapes inventory, functioning and development, Planetary permafrost, geomorphology and Earth analogues, From Coastal to Subsea Permafrost, Techniques of paleo environmental reconstruction from periglacial deposits, Reconstruction and Modelling of paleo permafrost, The role of geophysics in permafrost studies, Remote Sensing, DEMs and GIS applications in periglacial research, Permafrost and frozen ground engineering, Bridging the gap between models and observations in permafrost landscapes, Multi Decadal Perspectives on an International Permafrost Monitoring Program, Permafrost modeling across different scales Permafrost International Monitoring and Observing and Coordinating Activities. Some prominent speakers include Oleg Anisimov, James Bockheim, Christian Hauck.Timings 09:00 AM-06:00 PM (expected) * not verifiedEntry Fees Not available* * Check Official WebsiteParticipantsupto 100 DelegatesEstimated CountCategory & Type Conference MiscellaneousEditions 18-21 Jun 2014 Frequency Not Available Official Links Website Contacts Report Error Claim this event Event Reputation Organizer Reputation Based on ratings Venue Reputation Rating not availableOrganizer Send Stall Book RequestAbreu Destination Management Portugal 10 events listed 38.571779 -7.906986Venue Map & Directions Cathedral of \u00c9vora Largo do Marqu\u00eas de Marialva 809, 7000 \u00c9vora Portugal Get DirectionsFeatured Hotels in \u00c9voraINn MURUS GUEST HOUSE from EUR 38Pousada Convento de Evora from EUR 107Mont'sobro House from EUR 25Hotel Riviera from EUR 55 More Hotels Invite your friends, colleagues, customers and clients to this eventI am Interested Invite People to AttendRelated EventsMar 302019 Southern California Model United Nations Los Angeles, USAApr 072019 ENC Conference Monterey, USAApr 082019 Twist Conference for Women Charlotte, USAJun 072019 REBEL EM Conference San Antonio, USAJun 162019 Planet Philanthropy St. Augustine, USAMore Events Around \u00c9voraJul 072019 International Meiofauna Conference \u00c9vora, Portugal All EventsNever miss out on good eventsSUBSCRIBEor via All EventsConferencesMiscellaneousPortugal Android iPhone AboutCareer (Join us)Media & Press ReleasesHelp Center / FAQFeedbackProducts & ServicesEvent Management SoftwareEvent AppsEvent WebsiteEvent MarketingList your EventOrganizer LoginCompanyTestimonialsWidgetAll Event - by Country | by IndustryTrade Shows - by Country | by IndustryConferences - by Country | by IndustryTop 100 Events By continuing past this page, you agree to our Terms of Service, Cookie Policy, Privacy Policy and Content Policies. All trademarks are properties of their respective owners. \u00a9 2014-2019 - Tentimes Online Private Limited. All rights reserved.", "NASA Visible Earth: Rock Glacier on Mount Sopris A catalog of NASA images and animations of our home planet Skip Navigation (key s). Home Terms of Use Browse By: Sensor Collections Topic Rock Glacier on Mount Sopris Credit: NASA image created by Jesse Allen, Earth Observatory, using data provided courtesy of the NASA/GSFC/MITI/ERSDAC/JAROS, and U.S./Japan ASTER Science Team. Not all glaciers are made of ice. Some glaciers are made of rock. More accurately, they are composed of a combination of ice and rock. Opinions vary on how rock glaciers form, but geologists generally agree that one condition necessary for the formation and longevity of these natural formations is a climate cold enough to sustain permafrost. Rock glaciers that are big enough to have their own internal microclimates can maintain cool temperatures for some time, even when local temperatures are rising. Compared to ordinary glaciers, rock glaciers are rare, and may look like a rocky field shaped like a glacier. While regular glaciers flow, rock glaciers \u201ccreep.\u201d Some fine examples of rock glaciers live in Colorado, including this glacier on the slope of Mount Sopris in the Elk Mountains, in the western part of the state. The Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER) on NASA\u2019s Terra satellite acquired this image on July 8, 2006. This is a false-color image that mimics photo-like, natural color. Green indicates vegetation, dark blue indicates water, gray indicates bare rock, and white indicates ice or snow. Shaped vaguely like an amphitheatre but stretched out like putty, the rock glacier stretches off the northeast slope of Mount Sopris\u2019s east summit. Not far from the glacier\u2019s tip is lush-looking vegetation. Off the east edge of the glacier are some small bodies of water. The rate of movement for rock glaciers can vary, depending on each glacier\u2019s composition, underlying slope, and local weather conditions. In Colorado, the creep rates of rock glaciers range from less than 20 centimeters (8 inches) to more than 61 centimeters (24 inches) per year. Further Reading: Matthews, V., KellerLynn, K., and Fox, B., Eds. (2003). Messages in Stone: Colorado\u2019s Colorful Geology. Denver: Colorado Geological Survey. About Geology. Rock Glacier. Accessed August 24, 2006. Frauenfelder, R. Regional-scale Modelling of the Occurrence and Dynamics of Rockglaciers and the Distribution of Paleopermafrost. Accessed October 11, 2006. Images & Animations File File Dimensions mtsopris_ast_2005189.jpg 540x405 JPEG mtsopris_ast_2005189_lrg.jpg 2000x2000 JPEG 2 MB Note: Often times, due to the size, browsers have a difficult time opening and displaying images. If you experiece an error when clicking on an image link, please try directly downloading the image (using a right click, save as method) to view it locally. This image originally appeared on the Earth Observatory. Click here to view the full, original record. Subscribe to the RSS Feed Privacy Policy and Important Notices Contact Visible Earth National Climate Assessment Climate Resilience Toolkit Climate Data Initiative Webmaster: Paul Przyborski NASA Official: Robert Levy Database Updated: March 18, 2019 The Visible Earth is part of the EOS Project Science Office located at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center.", "(PDF) Paleo-Eskimo kitchen midden preservation in permafrost under future climate conditions at Qajaa, West Greenland | Bjarne Gr\u00f8nnow - Academia.edu Skip to main content Log InSign UpLog InSign Upmore\u00a0Job BoardAboutPressBlogPeoplePapersTermsPrivacyCopyright\u00a0We're Hiring!\u00a0Help Centerless pdfPaleo-Eskimo kitchen midden preservation in permafrost under future climate conditions at Qajaa, West GreenlandJournal of Archaeological Science, 2011Bjarne Gr\u00f8nnowDownload with GoogleDownload with Facebookor download with emailPaleo-Eskimo kitchen midden preservation in permafrost under future climate conditions at Qajaa, West GreenlandDownloadPaleo-Eskimo kitchen midden preservation in permafrost under future climate conditions at Qajaa, West GreenlandBjarne Gr\u00f8nnowLoading PreviewSorry, preview is currently unavailable. You can download the paper by clicking the button above.Related PapersGreenland Climate ChangeBy Jette Arneborg and Marit-Solveig SeidenkrantzThe thermal state of permafrost in the nordic area during the international polar year 2007\u20132009By Ole HumlumImpacts of peat and vegetation on permafrost degradation under climate warmingBy Ming-ko WooResilience and vulnerability of permafrost to climate changeThis article is one of a selection of papers from The Dynamics of Change in Alaska\u2019s Boreal Forests: Resilience and Vulnerability in Response to Climate WarmingBy Mikhail KanevskiyREAD PAPERDownload pdf \u00d7CloseLog InLog In\u00a0with\u00a0FacebookLog In\u00a0with\u00a0GoogleorEmail:Password:Remember me on this computeror\u00a0reset passwordEnter the email address you signed up with and we'll email you a reset link. Need an account?\u00a0Click here to sign up AboutBlogPeoplePapersJob BoardAdvertise\u00a0We're Hiring!\u00a0Help CenterFind new research papers in:PhysicsChemistryBiologyHealth SciencesEcologyEarth SciencesCognitive ScienceMathematicsComputer ScienceTermsPrivacyCopyrightAcademia \u00a92019", "Variability of carbonate pedofeatures in a loess-paleosol sequence and their use for paleoreconstructions | SpringerLink Skip to main content This service is more advanced with JavaScript available, learn more at http://activatejavascript.org Advertisement Hide SpringerLink Search SpringerLink Search Home Log in Journal of Mountain Science Journal of Mountain ScienceJune 2009, Volume 6, Issue\u00a02, pp 155\u2013161 | Cite asVariability of carbonate pedofeatures in a loess-paleosol sequence and their use for paleoreconstructionsAuthorsAuthors and affiliationsI.\u00a0KovdaS.\u00a0SychevaM.\u00a0LebedevaS.\u00a0InozemtzevArticleFirst Online: 10 May 2009 95 Downloads 8 Citations AbstractCarbonate pedofeatures were studied in details in a loess-paleosol pedocomplex near Kursk, in the central part of the European Plain. The soils studied included a modern Chernozem and five Pleistocene paleosols. Carbonate morphologies and distributions were described in the field. Various morphologies were sampled for further studies including micromorphology in thin sections and submicroscopic studies under a scanning electron microscope. The complex approach of investigation at macro-, micro-, and submicroscopic levels found that most of carbonate pedofeatures are secondary and multiphase. Many of them are related to cryogenic features. The general trend was of decreasing carbonate content in the older paleosols except for increased content in the 1st and 3rd paleosols. Most of carbonate morphologies are similar in the modern soil and paleosols, but pseudomycelium was found only in the modern Chernozem, while soft masses and impregnations are associated with the paleosols. Detailed study on carbonate attributes revealed their specific features in the modern soil and in paleosols. Veins have dissolution features under the modern environment and seem to reprecipitate in form of pseudomycelium. Coatings in paleosols at a depth of the 1st paleosol include specific fine tubes. Powdery soft masses and impregnations in the paleosols are strongly related to cryogenic fissures and paleopermafrost level. Under SEM they consist of tiny crystals, much smaller than in regular soft masses. Several types of hard concretions were identified: rounded, irregular and platy. Small concretions in the modern Chernozem have similar morphology and similar 14C-age as the rounded concretions of the upper paleosols. They are expected to represent the same generation of concretions. Platy concretions fill the bottom part of the large fissures. The 14C-age of hard concretions varies from 3310\u00b180 yrs. B.P in the 1st paleosol up to 20 400 yrs. B.P. in the 3rd. As a result we found the reflection of several wet-dry and cold-warm stages in carbonate morphologies and distributions. High variability of carbonates at macro-, micro- and submicroscopic levels indicates several generations and multiphase formation of carbonate pedofeatures in the loess-paleosol pedocomplex. Carbonate pedofeatures in the examined pedocomplex are more informative for the study of late Pleistocene and Holocene climatic cycles rather than characterization of a single paleosol.KeywordsLoess-paleosol pedocomplex\u00a0pedogenic carbonates\u00a0macr- and microforms\u00a0This is a preview of subscription content, log in to check access.PreviewUnable to display preview.\u00a0Download preview PDF.Unable to display preview.\u00a0Download preview PDF.ReferenceArinushkina E.V. 1970. Manual for Chemical Analyses of Soils. Moscow. Pp. 487. (In Russian)Google ScholarBal L. 1975a. Carbonate in Soil: A Theoretical Consideration on, and Proposal for its Fabric Analysis. 1. Crystic, Calcic and Fibrous Plasmic Fabric. Netherland Journal of Agricultural Science 23: 18\u201335.Google ScholarBal L. 1975b. Carbonate in Soil: A Theoretical Consideration on, and Proposal for its Fabric Analysis. 2. Crystal Tubes, Intercalary Crystals, K Fabric. Netherland Journal of Agricultural Science 23: 163\u2013176.Google ScholarBecze-De\u00e1k J., Langohr R. and Verrecchia E.P. 1997. Small Scale Secondary CaCO3 Accumulations in Selected Sections of the European Loess Belt. Morphological Forms and Potential for Paleoenvironmental Reconstruction. Geoderma 76: 221\u2013252.CrossRefGoogle ScholarBoguckyj A.B., Lanczont M., Lacka B., Madeyska T. and P. Zawidzki. 2006. Stable Isotopic Composition of Carbonates in Quaternary Sediments of the Skala Podil\u2019ska Sequence (Ukraine). Quaternary International 152\u2013153: 3\u201313.CrossRefGoogle ScholarBronger A. and Heinkele Th. 1989. Micromorphology and Genesis of Paleosols in the Luochuan Loess Section, China: Pedostratigraphic and Environmental Implications. Geoderma 45: 123\u2013143.CrossRefGoogle ScholarChadwick O.A., Sowers J.M. and Amundson R.G. 1988. Morphology of Calcite Crystals in Clast Coatings from four Soils in the Mojave Desert Region. Soil Science Society of America Journal 53: 211\u2013219.CrossRefGoogle ScholarGile L.H., Peterson F.F. and Grossman R.B. 1965. The K-horizon: a Master Soil Horizon of Carbonate Accumulation. Soil Science 99: 74\u201392.CrossRefGoogle ScholarGoudie A.S. 1983. Calcrete. In: Goudie A.S. and Pye K. (eds.), Chemical Sediments and Geomorphology. Academic Press, London, New York. Pp. 93\u2013131.Google ScholarSkripkin V.V. and Kovalyukh N.N. 1998. Recent Developments in the Procedures Used at the SSCER Laboratory for the Routine Preparation of Lithium Carbide. Radiocarbon. 40: 211\u2013214.Google ScholarLebedeva I.I. and Ovechkin S.V. 1975. New Formations of Carbonates in Chernozems of the Left Bank Ukraine. Pochvovedeniye 11: 14\u201330.Google ScholarMachette M.N. 1985. Calcic soils of the South-western United States. Geological Society of America Special Paper No 203. Pp. 1\u201321.Google ScholarNetterberg F., 1980. Geology of Southern African Calcretes. I. Terminology, Description, Macrofeatures and Classification. Transactions Geological Society of South Africa 83: 255\u2013283.Google ScholarPolyakov A.N. 1989. Micromorphological Investigation of Calcite in Chernozems of the European Part of the USSR. Pochvovedeniye 2: 79\u201386 (In Russian).Google ScholarSehgal J.L. and Stoops G. 1972. Pedogenic Calcite Accumulation in Arid and Semi-arid Regions of the Indo-Gangetic Alluvial Plain of Erstwhile Punjab (India) \u2014 Their Morphology and Origin. Geoderma 8: 59\u201372.CrossRefGoogle ScholarSycheva S.A. 1998. New Data on the Composition and Evolution of the Mezin Loess-paleosol Complex in the Russian Plain. Eurasian Soil Science 31(10): 1062\u20131074.Google ScholarSycheva S.A. 2004. Aleksandrov quarry. Late Pleistocene- Holocene Cover Complex: Paleosols, Loesses and Buried Balka. Polish Geological Institute Special Papers 13. Pp. 175\u2013182.Google ScholarSycheva S.A., Gunova V., Kovalyukh, N, Semenov V. 2002. The Middle Valdai Pedostratigraphy on the Russian Plain Juging from Data on Buried Gully Sediments of the Late Pleistocene. Upper Pliocene of the Southern Urals Region and its Significance for Correlation of the Eastern and Western Parts of Europe. INQUA. Commission on Stratigraphy and Subcommission of European Quaternary Stratigraphy (SEQS), Ufa, Russia.Google ScholarWilding L.P., Drees L.R. and Woodruffs C.M. Mineralogy and Microfabrics of Limestone Soils on Stepped Landscapes in Central Texas. In: S. Shoba, M. Gerasimova and R. Miedema (Eds.). Proceed. X Int. Working Meeting on Soil Micromorphology, Moscow, Russia, July 8\u201313, 1996. Soil Micromorphology: Studies on Soil Diversity, Diagnostics and Dynamics. Moscow-Wageningen. 1997. Pp. 204\u2013218Google ScholarCopyright information\u00a9\u00a0Science Press, Institute of Mountain Hazards and Environment, CAS and Springer-Verlag GmbH\u00a02009Authors and AffiliationsI.\u00a0Kovda1Email authorS.\u00a0Sycheva1M.\u00a0Lebedeva2S.\u00a0Inozemtzev31.Institute of GeographyMoscowRussia2.Institute of Soil ScienceMoscowRussia3.Dept. of Soil ScienceMoscow State UniversityMoscowRussia About this article Cite this article as: Kovda, I., Sycheva, S., Lebedeva, M. et al. J. Mt. Sci. (2009) 6: 155. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11629-009-1032-4 Received 07 January 2009 Accepted 14 March 2009 First Online 10 May 2009 DOI https://doi.org/10.1007/s11629-009-1032-4 Publisher Name SP Science Press Print ISSN 1672-6316 Online ISSN 1993-0321 About this journal Reprints and Permissions Personalised recommendations Cite article How to cite? .RIS Papers Reference Manager RefWorks Zotero .ENW EndNote .BIB BibTeX JabRef Mendeley Buy options Actions Log in to check access Buy article (PDF) USD\u00a039.95 Unlimited access to the article Instant PDF download Rent this article via DeepDyve Learn about institutional subscriptions Cite article How to cite? .RIS Papers Reference Manager RefWorks Zotero .ENW EndNote .BIB BibTeX JabRef Mendeley Advertisement Hide Over 10 million scientific documents at your fingertips Switch Edition Academic Edition Corporate Edition Home Impressum Legal information Privacy statement How we use cookies Accessibility Contact us Springer Nature \u00a9 2018 Springer Nature Switzerland AG. Part of Springer Nature. Not logged in Not affiliated 70.59.11.147", "Colloquium Series Spring 2018 | Department of Geology and Environmental Science | University of Pittsburgh Jump to navigation University of Pittsburgh Search form Search Pitt Home Dietrich School Find People Department of Geology and Environmental Science Prospective Undergraduates > Menu AboutImportant Dates Directions and Location News Events PeopleFaculty Instructors Postdocs & Research Staff Graduate Students Staff Emeriti Adjunct Faculty Visitors UndergraduateOverview of Programs Geology (BS) Environmental Science (BS) Environmental Studies (BA) GIS Certificate Register for Classes Courses GraduateOverview How to Apply Financial Support PhD Program MS Program Professional MS Program For Current Graduate Students Courses ResearchOverview Tectonic, Volcanic and Surface Processes Planetary Science and Astrobiology Paleoclimate and Environmental Change Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry Energy Geosciences Hydrologic Processes Dissertations & Theses FacilitiesOverview Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometers Mobile Air Quality Research Laboratory Regional Stable Isotope Laboratory for Earth and Environmental Science Research Organic Mass Spectrometers Elemental Analysis Instrumentation Separation Instrumentation Additional Facilities AlumniAlumni News Graduate Updates Undergraduate Updates Distinguished Alumni Giving Opportunities Nominations for Alumni Awards Colloquium Series Spring 2018 February 22, 2018 - 4:00pm Thaw 102 Dr. Dorothy Merritts Harry W. & Mary B. Huffnagle Professor of Geosciences Program Chair of Environmental Studies Franklin & Marschall College Legacy landscapes:\u00a0 Freeze-dried, thawed permafrost\u00a0landscapes, breached dams, and wetland-floodplain stream restoration, eastern United States Decades of research on the geomorphology of the mid-Atlantic US make it timely to synthesize long-term (104 \u2013 106) rates of geologic erosion and sediment generation with paleo-ecological and geomorphic records of landscape change. Such a synthesis reveals that legacy landscape effects from Pleistocene cold-climate conditions pre-determined Holocene warm-climate landforms and processes throughout the mid-Atlantic region. These periglacial landscape legacies likewise pre-determined the response of modern streams to base-level change from breaching (or removal) of 18th-19th century milldams. Most modern channels are in a transient state, one characterized by incision through historic and Holocene sediment into underlying Pleistocene cold-climate deposits and landforms.\u00a0 North of the latitude of present-day Annapolis, Maryland (~39\uf0b0) relict landforms provide a record of paleo-permafrost, consistent with previous paleocological work that indicates tundra vegetation during the late Pleistocene. Using lidar, orthoimagery, and geomorphic and paleoecological studies, we and our collaborators find extensive networks of thermal contraction polygons in shale bedrock; ubiquitous gelifluction sheets and lobes up to 10s of m thick on side slopes and valley bottoms; retrogressive thaw slumps and other thermokarst features; and water tracks similar to those in the Dry Valleys of Antarctica. We dated the sand infill within a relict thermal contract wedge to 14.9 \uf0b1 1.8 ka (1 sigma weighted mean age for two OSL ages). Gelifluction on hillslopes produced poorly sorted, matrix-supported deposits indicative of mass movement under saturated conditions.\u00a0 These deposits accumulated in valley bottoms, leading to local aggradation. We have identified fluvial channel networks buried by colluvium north of ~39\uf0b0 latitude, but this paleo-climatic signature diminishes southward beyond the limits of paleo-permafrost.\u00a0 Holocene landscape stability was enhanced by Pleistocene cold-climate conditions that led to widespread coarse-grained colluvial deposition on hillslopes and valley bottoms.\u00a0 Our radiocarbon dating at dozens of mid-Atlantic sites, combined with paleo-seed and other macro-fossil analysis, indicates that valley bottom wetlands supplied by groundwater became established on a substrate of periglacial deposits during the early Holocene in low-order (1st to 3rd) watersheds. Oldest radiocarbon dates from organic-rich wetland soils typically are \u226411.2 ka, post-dating the Younger Dryas cold period. At one valley bottom location (Great Marsh, southeastern PA), our calibrated radiocarbon dates of 19.1-19.9 kyrs BP for organic matter in silt immediately below a 12.1-13.2 kyrs BP organic-rich soil indicate a late Pleistocene-Holocene transition erosional disconformity between ~13.2 and 19.1 kyr BP. Multiple lines of evidence suggest this was a time of intense eolian activity and flushing of some sediment along valley bottoms. By early Holocene wetlands had become established at groundwater level throughout the region, and many persisted continuously until European settlement.\u00a0 Sedimentation rates in Holocene wetlands were low, typically <0.1 mm/yr.\u00a0 Widespread mill damming for water power, however, buried many valley bottom wetlands, with 18th-19th c. sedimentation rates at least 10-100 x greater. Regional studies in the eastern US indicate long-term, low erosion rates of ~8 to 15 m m.y.\u20131, whereas historic hillslope erosion rates are estimated to have been ~100 x greater and contemporary sediment yields up to 10 times greater (Reusser et al, 2015). Our work with LiDAR DEM differencing (acquisition in 2008 and 2014) indicates that historic reservoir sediment stored upstream of breached milldams is eroded rapidly as knickpoints propagate through this sediment.\u00a0 These erosion rates can be 1000 times greater than long-term geologic rates. Furthermore, Pleistocene colluvium beneath this historic sediment is more readily scoured because of high stream banks after incision and can enhance bank erosion as gravel bars of reworked colluvium develop along meander bends.\u00a0 In essence, valley bottoms with stored historic sediment in the eastern US are in a transient state for which \u201cmemory\u201d strongly affects modern processes and rates of erosion. Department E-Newsletter Check out our 2018 E-Newsletter! Pittsburgh Collaboratory for Water Research, Education, and Outreach The\u00a0Pittsburgh Collaboratory for Water Research, Education, and Outreach\u00a0is a platform\u00a0for knowledge sharing, collaboration, and training dedicated to applying science-based\u00a0approaches to resolve local, regional, and global water sustainability issues. Climate and Global Change Center We are a multidisciplinary center comprised of researchers from different departments throughout the University of Pittsburgh. Our aim is to advance research collaborations among departments to develop cross-disciplinary projects that focus on climate change. Footer Logo Footer Contact Block The Kenneth P. Dietrich School of Arts and Sciences University of Pittsburgh 4107 O'Hara Street SRCC, Room 200 Pittsburgh, PA 15260-3332 412-624-8780 Copyright 2013\u20132019 Send feedback about this site", "Data for polar-regions research (Technical Report) | OSTI.GOV skip to main content Sign In Create Account U.S. Department of EnergyOffice of Scientific and Technical Information Search terms: Advanced search options Advanced Search OptionsAdvanced Search queries use a traditional Term Search. For more info, see our FAQ. All Fields: Title: Creator / Author: Identifier Numbers: Publication Date: to More Options ... Full Text: Resource Type: Journal Article Technical Report Data Software Patent Conference / Event Book / Monograph Program Document Thesis / Dissertation Video / Audio Miscellaneous Subject: Site: All Research Org: Sponsoring Org: Update Date: to Limit to INIS / NSA records only Limit to Nobel Prize winning records only Search Submit Submit Research Results Search Tools Public Access Policy Data Services & Dev Tools About FAQs News Sign In Create Account OSTI.GOV Technical Report: Data for polar-regions research Title: Data for polar-regions research Full Record Other Related Research Abstract Datasets available for polar research on global change topics are summarized. Emphasis is given to data that define the large, including rawinsonde data, surface meteorological observations, cloud drift winds, atmospheric analyses, sea ice, planetary radiation, and ocean forcing. Plans are discussed for making improved atmospheric analyses, using existing data. The use of CD-ROMs and DAT technologies for data distribution is discussed and selected CD-ROMs are listed. Authors: Jenne, R.L. Publication Date: Sun Mar 01 00:00:00 EST 1992 Research Org.: National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO (United States) OSTI Identifier: 7161595 Alternate Identifier(s): OSTI ID: 7161595 Report Number(s): AD-P-007274/4/XAB Resource Type: Technical Report Resource Relation: Other Information: This article is from 'Proceedings of the International Conference on the Role of the Polar Regions in Global Change Held in Fairbanks, Alaska on 11-15 June 1990. Volume 1', AD-A253 027, p107-111 Country of Publication: United States Language: English Subject: 54 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCES; POLAR REGIONS; CLIMATIC CHANGE; CLOUDS; ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS; ICE; SEAS; SNOW; WIND; ATMOSPHERIC PRECIPITATIONS; SURFACE WATERS 540110* Citation Formats MLA APA Chicago Bibtex Jenne, R.L. Data for polar-regions research. United States: N. p., 1992. Web. Copy to clipboard Jenne, R.L. Data for polar-regions research. United States. Copy to clipboard Jenne, R.L. Sun . \"Data for polar-regions research\". United States. Copy to clipboard @article{osti_7161595, title = {Data for polar-regions research}, author = {Jenne, R.L.}, abstractNote = {Datasets available for polar research on global change topics are summarized. Emphasis is given to data that define the large, including rawinsonde data, surface meteorological observations, cloud drift winds, atmospheric analyses, sea ice, planetary radiation, and ocean forcing. Plans are discussed for making improved atmospheric analyses, using existing data. The use of CD-ROMs and DAT technologies for data distribution is discussed and selected CD-ROMs are listed.}, doi = {}, journal = {}, number = , volume = , place = {United States}, year = {Sun Mar 01 00:00:00 EST 1992}, month = {Sun Mar 01 00:00:00 EST 1992} } Copy to clipboard Technical Report: Other availability Please see Document Availability for additional information on obtaining the full-text document. Library patrons may search WorldCat to identify libraries that may hold this item. Keep in mind that many technical reports are not cataloged in WorldCat. Save / Share: Export Metadata Endnote RIS CSV XML Save to My Library You must Sign In or Create an Account in order to save documents to your library. LinkedIn Pinterest Tumblr Similar records in OSTI.GOV collections: Paleoenviromental data from less-investigated polar regions Technical Report Vaikmae, R. The Arctic holds extensive records of past climatic and environmental changes. Stable isotope variations in polar ice are in many cases important records of paleoclimatic information. Deep ice cores from Antarctica and Greenland, reaching back through the last glaciation, have provided valuable information about the Earth's climate in the past. This paper discusses the oxygen-18 variations in intermediate-depth ice cores from smaller ice caps of Svalbard, Severnaya Zemlya (North Land) and from the marginal area of the Antarctic ice sheet, covering the time span from 1000 to 8000 years B.P. All profiles studied clearly reflect the main climatic events duringmore\u00a0\u00bb this time interval. However, small shifts in time exist between details on different curves. Most probably this is due to certain asynchronity in climatic changes in the various regions. There are extensive areas in the Arctic, especially in its eastern sector, where no glaciers currently exist and, possibly, in some areas never existed in the past either. These are the areas of permafrost where several forms of ice occur Within the ground. The source water for most types of ground ice originates from precipitation, but unlike glacier ice, the range of mechanisms for the formation of ground ice is very large, which considerably complicates the interpretation of their isotopic characteristics. For paleoclimatic and paleopermafrost reconstructions, the isotopic content of polygonal wedge ice seems to be most promising. The attempts to use isotopic records from segregated ice for paleoenvironmental research will also be discussed.\u00ab\u00a0less Collaborative research on the Northeast Water Polynya: NEWP92 hydrographic data report. USCGC Polar Sea cruise, July 15--August 15, 1992 Technical Report Wallace, D.W.R. ; Behrens, W.J. ; Hopkins, T.S. ; ... The Northeast Water Polynya (NEW) off the northeast coast of Greenland was the focus of two cruises aboard the USCGC Polar Sea during the summers of 1992 and 1993. The cruises were supported by the National Science Foundation Arctic Systems Science (ARCSS) program and were part of the Arctic Ocean Science Board`s International Arctic Polynya Program. The Polar Sea cruises were designed as multidisciplinary studies to test hypotheses about the mechanisms of heat, water and carbon flow within and beyond the boundaries of the polynya. Preliminary results of the 1992 study have been described elsewhere. A collection of papers arisingmore\u00a0\u00bb from the 1992 cruise have been published in a Special Section of the Journal of Geophysical Research. This data report presents the hydrographic and basic chemical observations made from CTD/Rosette casts during the 1992 cruise. The station positions cruise are plotted in Figure 1. Also included in the report are selected section plots and vertical profiles. A total of 130 CTD casts were made during the cruise, measuring pressure, temperature, conductivity, dissolved oxygen, fluorescence and light transmission. Discrete samples were collected in 10-liter, rosette-mounted, Niskin bottles and analyzed, from most casts, for: salinity, dissolved nutrients, dissolved oxygen, anthropogenic halocarbons (e.g., Freon gases), pigments, particulate organic carbon and nitrogen. Suspended particulate matter was analyzed at selected stations and these data were used to calibrate the CTD-transmissometer. Samples were collected from selected stations and depths for tritium and helium analyses, carbonate chemistry, as well as for measurements of bacterial abundance.\u00ab\u00a0less DOI: 10.2172/102497 Full Text Available Auroral x-ray contamination of the low energy proton spectrometer on the S3-2 satellite in the polar regions. Report for 1 January-31 August 1980 Technical Report Boyle, R.P. ; Parsignault, D.R. The Low Energy Proton Spectrometer (LEPS) on board the Air Force S3-2 polar orbiting satellite recorded, at polar latitudes, high anomalous counts coming from the auroral zone direction, over the December 1975 through April 1976 operational period. Despite the low sensitivity of the Si(Li) LEPS detector to X-rays, bremsstrahlung from precipitating electrons in the hundred keV energy range is given as the source of these observations. Solar-cycle variations of coronal neutral lines and polar regions activity Technical Report Makarov, V.I. ; Makarova, V.V. ; Koutchmy, S. ; ... Observations of the corona, of prominences, of polar faculae and of large scale magnetic fields show solar activity over all latitudes, in contrast with sunspot activity, which is limited to mid-latitudes. The global behavior of the solar activity is considered here thanks to the analysis of chromospheric synoptic maps which include the location of H/alpha/ and Ca II k prominences. The process of migration of neutral lines during the cycle (supposed to represent the large-scale coronal magnetic field) is shown. After subsequent averaging of the maps, a discrete number of latitude zones is found: not more than 10, the mostmore\u00a0\u00bb probable number being 3 or 5. This suggests the occurrence of dominant modes (1=3 and 1=5) of the large-scale coronal magnetic field and inferred coronal structures for different epochs of the solar cycle. The geoactivity of coronal streamers could be related to the modes, noticing the dipole (1=1) mode is almost absent. A more-detailed analysis points to the importance of the poleward migration of neutral lines (with v = 5 to 40 micro sec-1). The nonsymmetric behavior of the N and S hemisphere as well as the erratic behavior of the corresponding sunspot activity in each hemisphere is emphasized, which reflects the behavior of both the radial component and the toroidal component of the field.\u00ab\u00a0less Coherence scales of wavefield during propagation through naturally disturbed ionosphere in the polar cap, auroral, and equatorial regions Technical Report Basu, S. ; Basu, S. ; Livingston, R.C. Phase and intensity scintillation measurements have been made at low latitudes in the equatorial anomaly region, and at high latitudes in the auroral oval and the polar cap regions, using phase coherent transmissions at 250 MHz from stationary and near stationary satellites. The observations pertain to periods of high solar activity when intense scintillation activity is recorded at each of the above observing sites. This data set has been utilized to study the reduction of coherence times of intensity and complex amplitude scintillation with increasing strength of scattering. Estimates of coherence scales of intensity and complex amplitude scintillation at 250more\u00a0\u00bb MHz are provided which indicate that coherent scales of scintillation are typically of the order of hundreds of meters at high latitudes but approach values as small as tens of meters in the equatorial anomaly region. The phase spectral index in the nightside auroral oval is observed to be much steeper (p sub psi = .4) than those typically observed in the equatorial (p sub psi = 2.4) or polar cap regions (p sub psi approx. -2.3). It shows the importance of large scale phase variations in the nightside auroral oval. Under strong scatter conditions, the coherence times of complex amplitude scintillation are shown to asymptotically approach a value which is 1.4 times the coherence time of intensity scintillation. This result is consistent with the theoretical predictions for Rayleigh statistics.\u00ab\u00a0less Similar Records Website Policies / Important Links Contact Us", "Circumpolar Active-Layer Permafrost System (CAPS) - Data.gov Skip to content Skip to content Jump to Content Search for: Search data.gov Data Topics Agriculture Climate Consumer Ecosystems Education Energy Finance Health Local Government Manufacturing Maritime Ocean Public Safety Science & Research Impact Applications Developers Contact Data Catalog Organizations Home Datasets Home National Oceanic and ... Submit Data Story Report Data Issue Circumpolar Active-Layer Permafrost System (CAPS) Metadata Updated: September 27, 2015 The Circumpolar Active-Layer Permafrost System (CAPS) contains over 100 data sets pertaining to permafrost and frozen ground topics. It also contains detailed metadata records describing over 100 additional data sets available at other GGD nodes around the world. Dozens of contributors submitted data collections representing global sites. This compilation of data and information products is intended for a broad audience including the scientific and engineering communities, educators, and policy makers. The data published on CAPS is available through the Frozen Ground Data Center (FGDC) database. Access & Use Information License: U.S. Government Work Downloads & Resources Web PageHTML 49 views Documentation URL Link is ok Openness score Visit page Web Pageapplication/vnd.lotus-organizer Link is ok Openness score Download Web Page Link is ok Openness score Visit page Web Page Link is ok Openness score Visit page Web Pageapplication/vnd.lotus-organizer Link is ok Openness score Download Dates Metadata Date August 13, 2015 Metadata Created Date September 27, 2015 Metadata Updated Date September 27, 2015 Reference Date(s) January 1, 2003 (publication) Frequency Of Update asNeeded Metadata Source ISO-19139 ISO-19139 Metadata Download Metadata \u00b7 View Full Metadata Harvested from NOAA CSW Harvest Source atmosphere international arcti... united states of am... southern europe north america soil properties scandanavia continent boreholes mongolia united kingdom add geocryology solar radiation soil classification argentina norway nsidc thermokarst land surface temper... cryopedology field investigations gtn-p amd belgium cryosols kazakhstan meteorology terrestrial hydrosp... netherlands frozen ground national snow and i... remote sensing denmark thermal properties topographic survey mountain permafrost circumpolar active ... switzerland snow/ice western europe surface air tempera... terminology cryosphere greenland global change maste... climate change glaciation geothermal gradient canada gcmd asia paleoclimate south america permafrost features periglacial processes permafrost properties arctic environmenta... south atlantic ocean active layer europe slope processes freeze/thaw ggd china international perma... modeling geographic region seasonally frozen g... antarctic master di... sediments permafrost temperature seasonal freeze/thaw periglacial features permafrost software romania ipa eastern asia africa aedd austria southern ocean diurnal freeze/thaw earth science gis vertical location eastern europe france permafrost extent land surface calm atmospheric tempera... bedrock thaw british isles north atlantic ocean frost tundra southern africa ease-grid geophysics chile hydrology hydrogeology spain soil temperature sweden patterned ground russian federation land temperature paleo-permafrost russia discontinuous perma... talik south georgia island svalbard and jan mayen soils engineering permafrost distribu... global geocryologic... continuous permafrost italy south africa land records geology snow vegetation south shetland islands iceland arctic mid-latitude mapping rock glaciers germany ice-wedge polygons monitoring bibliographies atlantic ocean northern europe bts measurements global terrestrial ... poland air temperature ocean soil moisture southcentral asia ground ice Additional Metadata Resource Type Dataset Metadata Date August 13, 2015 Metadata Created Date September 27, 2015 Metadata Updated Date September 27, 2015 Reference Date(s) January 1, 2003 (publication) Responsible Party University of Southampton (Principal Investigator); National Snow and Ice Data Center (Point of Contact); Geological Survey of Canada (Principal Investigator); Uppsala University (Principal Investigator); The University Centre in Svalbard (Principal Investigator); Russian Academy of Sciences, Siberian Branch (Principal Investigator); University of Delaware (Principal Investigator); Lund University (Principal Investigator); VAW-ETH (Principal Investigator); University of Southhampton (Principal Investigator); International Permafrost Association (Principal Investigator); Siberian Branch, Russian Academy of Sciences (Principal Investigator); University of Colorado (Principal Investigator) Contact Email jerrybrown@igc.apc.org Access Constraints There are no restrictions on access to these data., There are no restrictions on use of these data. Please cite the data using the citation example given in the documentation. Please cite the CD itself as follows: International Permafrost Association, Data and Information Working Group, comp. Circumpolar Active-Layer Permafrost System (CAPS), version 1.0. CD-ROM available from National Snow and Ice Data Center, nsidc@nsidc.org. Boulder, Colorado: NSIDC, University of Colorado at Boulder. Bbox East Long 180 Bbox North Lat 90 Bbox South Lat -90 Bbox West Long -180 Coupled Resource Frequency Of Update asNeeded Guid noaa.ncei.nsidc.G01175 Harvest Object Id efbcfcfe-2df3-4dd4-b2aa-0ba583d25d29 Harvest Source Id 2aed8e29-fc5b-4cde-aa66-fb1118fd705e Harvest Source Title NOAA CSW Harvest Source Licence Metadata Language Metadata Type geospatial Progress complete Spatial Data Service Type Spatial Reference System Spatial Harvester True Temporal Extent Begin Unknown Temporal Extent End Unknown Didn't find what you're looking for? Suggest a dataset here. Federal National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce Topics Climate Arctic Permafrost and Arctic Landscapes Arctic Peoples and Ecosystems Contact jerrybrown@igc.apc.org Share on Social Sites Google+ Twitter Facebook Federal National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce Dataset extent Map tiles & Data by OpenStreetMap, under CC BY SA. Data.Gov 2.0 Privacy and Website Policies USA.GOV PERFORMANCE.GOV About Open Government Blog Metrics Events Login Twitter Github", "The Netherlands - International Permafrost Association Arctic Portal AP Community Portlets Arctic Council Science Organizations Maps Library Acronyms Links Search International Permafrost Association Fostering permafrost research to the ends of the Earth Search ... Member login Contact \ufeff Menu HomeAbout Us Antarctic Permafrost and Periglacial EnvironmentsCoastal and Offshore Permafrost Dynamics (COPD)CryosolGlaciers and Permafrost Hazards in High Mountain Slopes (GAPHAZ)Isotopes and Geochemistry of PermafrostPeriglacial Landforms, Processes and ClimatePermafrost and Climate Modeling and Mapping Subgroup Planetary Permafrost and AstrobiologyPermafrost Engineering Subgroup on Engineering Geology for Development in Permafrost Regions Task Force on Remote SensingTask Force on Subglacial PermafrostStanding Committee on Data, Information and CommunicationsStanding Committee on Education and OutreachInternational Advisory Committee for ICOPCarbon Pools in Permafrost Regions (CAPP)Arctic Circumpolar Coastal Observatory Network (ACCONET)Arctic Coastal Dynamics (ACD)International Polar Year (2007-2009) OfficersCountry MembersConstitutionResolutionsExternal RelationsStanding Committees ANTPASEducation & Outreach HistoryBecome a Member Activities Action GroupsInterest Groups Permafrost and Carbon Budgets Core Projects PRP IPA Awards Pewe AwardMelnikov AwardLifetime Award Outreach Outreach ActivitiesPYRN Meetings International ConferencesRegional Conferences Publications IPA Newsletter - Frozen GroundIPA Country ReportsPPP ReportsConference ProceedingsReports and MinutesHandbookGlossaryOccasional Publications What is Permafrost?International Report \"State of the Arctic Coast 2010\" Products Permafrost Data IPA Permafrost MapGTN-P Workshop 2015GTN-P Workshop 2013GTN-P Workshop 2011TSPCALM Mailing ListCourses (IUCP)Media PrintGalleriesPodcasts Member Area Home Publications IPA Country Reports 2014 The Netherlands International Permafrost Association Country Reports The Netherlands Print Email Paleopermafrost Under the co-ordination of Prof. Jef Vandenberghe the IPA- Action Group has terminated the project 'Permafrost extension during the Last Glacial Maximum in the northern hemisphere and derived mean annual temperatures'. The map of maximum permafrost extension towards the end of the last glacial is published in Boreas 43-3 (2014) together with a number of related papers. The project will be continued in a new action group, coordinated by Prof. Huijun Jin. Carbon exchange from permafrost soils and ecosystems Research on the carbon cycle and greenhouse gas emission of present-day permafrost environments is conducted by VU University Amsterdam (Prof A.J. Dolman, Dr. J. van Huissteden) and Wageningen University (Dr. M. Heijmans). The research projects in Siberia are conducted in close collaboration with Russian counterparts (Russian Academy of Sciences - IBPC, Dr. T.C. Maximov) and Z\u00fcrich University in Switzerland, Dr. Schaepman-Strub.At the Kytalyk reserve near Chokurdagh in the Indigirka lowlands (VU and Wageningen University) research focusses on CO2 and CH4 fluxes of tundra ecosystems on continuous permafrost. This site is a primary site in the EU Framework 7 PAGE21 project and moreover closely collaborates with Japanese researchers in the GRENE-TEA project who have established research sites in the tundra-taiga transition south of Kytalyk near Chokurdagh.Starting in 2011, the CO2 and CH4 fluxes at the site have been measured with two eddy covariance towers, one fixed reference tower on an ancient drained thaw lake basin, and one roving tower, set up alternating at the edge of the river floodplain and the edge of a thaw lake (Figure 1). In 2014, the field activities for two PhD projects at Kytalyk, conducting eddy covariance and chamber flux measurements and monitoring of permafrost changes have finished. Flux measurements at the site will be continued in 2015, financed by PAGE21 and a new Dutch research programme, Netherlands Earth System Science Centre (NESSC). Within the framework of NESSC more focus will be laid on the carbon balance with thermokarst lakes. The site now has collected 11 years of CO2 flux data and 10 years of CH4 flux data. A synthesis publication is in progress. Figure 1. Eddy covariance tower for monitoring CO2 and CH4 fluxes set up near thaw lake bank at Kytalyk research station. The Wageningen University team continued their measurements in two long-term field experiments: a Betula nana shrub removal experiment and a soil warming experiment. Removing the shrub part of the vegetation initiated thawing of ice-rich permafrost, resulting in collapse of the originally elevated shrub patches into waterlogged depressions within five years. This thaw pond development shifted the plots from a methane sink into a methane source (Nauta et al. 2014, Nature Climate Change). By 2014, one of the 10-m diameter removal plots has become almost completely a pond (Figure 2). In the soil warming experiment, solar panels feed heating cables buried at 15 cm depth in the ground (Figure 3). This additional heating increased thawing depth with consequences for soil moisture, soil available nutrients and vegetation composition. In 2014 we sampled both above and belowground biomass to test whether relatively deep-rooting graminoids expand at the cost of shallow-rooting low shrubs with increased thawing. Figure 2. Shrub removal plot developing into pond. Figure 3. Soil warming experiment located in tussock tundra. Effect of paleo-permafrost on hydraulic properties of sediments The Dutch Geological Survey (subdivision od TNO) is conducting research on the hydraulic properties of aquifers and aquicludes in Quaternary deposits in the Netherlands. Glacial till in the northern part of the Netherlands can be an important barrier for groundwater flow. Cryoturbation locally leads to sandy intrusions in the upper part of the till, lowering the hydraulic resistance (Figure 4). Recently the excavation of a new waterway in the province of Drenthe revealed cryoturbation structures (see Figure) and allowed in-situ measurements of hydraulic resistance in these cryoturbated zones. This research uses these and other results to determine the general depth and degree of cryoturbation in till in the Netherlands, and quantify its effects on hydraulic conductivity. Figure 4. Cryoturbatic structures in glacial till. Report prepared by Ko van Huissteden (\u00a0ko.van.huissteden@geo.falw.vu.nl) Prev Next IPA Newsletter - Frozen Ground IPA Country Reports PPP Reports Conference Proceedings Reports and Minutes Handbook Glossary Occasional Publications What is Permafrost? Contact: contact@ipa-permafrost.orgThe International Permafrost Association website is designed and hosted by the Arctic PortalCopyright \u00a9 2008-2015 International Permafrost Association All Rights Reserved IPA on Facebook IPA on Twitter IPA on Youtube IPA RSS", "Hedding, David \u2013 AASP Sobre la AASP Newsletter Contacto Buscar: Buscar Ir al contenido Inicio ORGANIZACI\u00d3N Constituci\u00f3n Informaci\u00f3n para socios CUOTA SOCIETARIA MIEMBROS A-B Ahumada, Ana L\u00eda Alonso, Victoria Anetas, Gilen Arenson, Lukas Az\u00f3car Sandoval, Guillermo Bodin, Xavier Bornet, Damien Borzotta, Enrique Bottegal, Estefan\u00eda Laura Bl\u00f6the, Jan Brenning, Alexander C-D E-G Falaschi, Daniel Fern\u00e1ndez Navarro, Hans Forte, Ana Paula Gallardo, Nahuel Gillespie, Alan Goyanes, Gabriel H-M Halla, Christian Hedding, David Hernandez, Jos\u00e9 Hiruma, Silvio Iba\u00f1ez Palacios, Gloria Patricia Kinnard, Christophe Koury, Peter Martini, Mateo Mendoza, Mart\u00edn Monnier, S\u00e9bastien N-P Pastore, Silvio Pecker Marcosig, Ivanna Perucca, Laura Patricia Q-S Ramires, Amalia Roig, Fidel Ruiz, Lucas Schittek, Karsten Schrott, Lothar Sileo, Noelia Sletten, Ronald T-Z Tapia Baldis, Carla Toledo, Mario Trombotto, Dar\u00edo Villalba, Ricardo Villarroel, Cristian Vivero, Sebasti\u00e1n Wainstein, Pablo Wingenroth, M\u00f3nica Cristina NOVEDADES Reuniones CURSOS Multimedia Art\u00edculos \u00bfQu\u00e9 es la Geocriolog\u00eda? \u00bfQu\u00e9 es el Ambiente Periglacial? \u00bfQu\u00e9 es el Permafrost? Ordenamiento Territorial y el ambiente criosf\u00e9rico Modelo Num\u00e9rico de Distribuci\u00f3n de Permafrost de Monta\u00f1a Hidrolog\u00eda Periglacial Paleopermafrost Publicaciones 1983 \u2013 Acta Geocriog\u00e9nica I 1984 \u2013 Acta Geocriog\u00e9nica II 1985 \u2013 Acta Geocriog\u00e9nica III 1986 \u2013 Acta Geocriog\u00e9nica IV 1989 \u2013 Acta Geocriog\u00e9nica V 2002 a 2010 2012 2013 2014 2015 a 2016 Publicaciones Especiales Galer\u00eda de im\u00e1genes Galer\u00eda de Videos Pol\u00edtica de privacidad Inicio Qui\u00e9nes somos Hedding, David Hedding, David David William Hedding I am a geomorphologist who focuses on understanding landforms and landscape processes in periglacial environments, primarily in the sub-Antarctic and Antarctic. My research has also incorporated studies on weathering processes (rock decay) and I am in the process of setting up a weathering simulation laboratory at the University of South Africa Science Campus, Florida, in which I hope to conduct research on predominantly mechanical weathering processes. On sub-Antarctic Marion Island, I have recently started to investigate aeolian (wind-driven) processes and landforms. I am also investigating the use of terrestrial cosmogenic nuclide dating of glacially-eroded surfaces and glacial deposits and seafloor mapping to develop a geochronology of the glaciation of sub-Antarctic Marion Island since the Last Glacial Maximum. On Round Island, near Mauritius in the Indian Ocean, I am part of a team of researchers who are investigating the interplay between rainfall erosivity and the erodibility of soils and rock on the island. Finally, I have obtained a C2 rating from the South African National Research Foundation and am Associate Professor in the Department of Geography at the University of South Africa in which I teach undergraduate modules on physical geography, environmental science and environmental awareness and responsibility. Contacto heddidw@unisa.ac.za Publicaciones 1- Hedding, D., 2016. Pronival Ramparts: Origin and development of terminology. Erkunde, vol. 70 (2): 141-151. Summary: Pronival ramparts are debris ridges formed at the downslope margins of perennial or semi-permanent snowbeds at the foot of bedrock cliffs. The close spatial proximity and morphological similarities of pronival ramparts to modified talus sheets and cones as well as protalus rock glaciers, moraines and landslides has led to difficulties in correctly identifying ramparts. Nevertheless, these landforms have been documented across the globe and, as a result, terms have been developed in different languages. However, the use and meaning of rampart terminology, particularly across several languages, are not consistent. This paper chronicles the origin of the term \u2018pronival rampart\u2019 and assesses its use in English language literature and exposes readers to terms from other languages and how their use may differ. Lastly, this paper highlights that, since the meaning of terms denoting pronival ramparts varies between languages, readers should be cognisant of the meaning of the term in a respective language as this may have implications for how pronival ramparts are identified in the context of talus-derived landforms. The paper also discusses whether ramparts are part of a non-developmental or developmental morphological continuum of talus-derived landforms. 2- Rudolph, E.M.; Meiklejohn, K.I., Hansen, C.D.; Hedding, D.W. and Nel, W., 2018. Rock glaciers in the Jutulsessen, Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica. Polish Polar Research, vol. 39 (1): 1-17. DESCARGAR Comentarios cerrados. Buscar: Buscar Recursos\u00bfQu\u00e9 es la geocriolog\u00eda? \u00bfQu\u00e9 es el ambiente periglacial? \u00bfQu\u00e9 es permafrost? Ordenamiento Territorial y el ambiente criosf\u00e9rico Modelo N\u00famerico de Distribuci\u00f3n de Permafrost de Monta\u00f1a Sitios de Inter\u00e9s International Permafrost Association (IPA) Arctic Portal National Snow and Data Center Climate and Cryosphere Sudam\u00e9rica Inventario Nacional de Glaciares (Argentina) Mapa de la Probabilidad de Permafrost para los Andes Semiaridos Chilenos Glaciares de Argentina CON\u00d3CENOS 1 NOTICIAS 1 ARCHIVO MULTIMEDIA 1 CONTACTO NEWSLETTER 1 2 AASP - Asociaci\u00f3n Argentina y Sudamericana de Permafrost. Todos los derechos reservados, Noviembre de 2011. Adapted by Fuxia Estudio Creado con Nirvana & WordPress.", "Permafrost - Wikipedia Permafrost From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article is about frozen ground. For other uses, see Permafrost (disambiguation). PermafrostMap showing extent and types of permafrost in the Northern HemisphereUsed inInternational Permafrost AssociationClimateHigh latitudes, alpine regions Wikinews has related news: Scientists warn thawing Siberia may trigger global meltdown Slope failure of permafrost soil, revealing ice lenses. In geology, permafrost is ground,[1] including rock or (cryotic) soil, at or below the freezing point of water 0\u00a0\u00b0C (32\u00a0\u00b0F) for two or more years. Most permafrost is located in high latitudes (in and around the Arctic and Antarctic regions), but at lower latitudes alpine permafrost occurs at higher elevations. Ground ice is not always present, as may be in the case of non-porous bedrock, but it frequently occurs and it may be in amounts exceeding the potential hydraulic saturation of the ground material. Permafrost accounts for 0.022% of total water on Earth[2] and the permafrost region covers 24% of exposed land in the Northern Hemisphere.[3] It also occurs subsea on the continental shelves of the continents surrounding the Arctic Ocean, portions of which were exposed during the last glacial period.[4] The thawing of permafrost has implications for the global climate.[5] A global temperature rise of 1.5\u00a0\u00b0C (2.7\u00a0\u00b0F) above current levels would be enough to start the thawing of permafrost in Siberia, according to one group of scientists.[6][7] Contents 1 History 2 Extent 2.1 Continuity of coverage 2.1.1 Discontinuous permafrost 2.1.2 Continuous permafrost 2.2 Alpine permafrost 2.3 Subsea permafrost 3 Manifestations 3.1 Base depth 3.2 Massive ground ice 3.3 Landforms 3.4 Carbon cycle in permafrost 4 Climate change effects 4.1 Historical changes 4.2 Thaw 4.3 Effect on slope stability 4.4 Ecological consequences 4.5 Predicted rate of change in the Arctic 5 Other issues 5.1 Construction on permafrost 5.2 Revival of organisms preserved in permafrost 6 See also 7 References 8 External links History[edit] \"In contrast to the relative dearth of reports on frozen ground in north America prior to World War II, a vast literature on the engineering aspects of permafrost was available in Russian. Beginning in 1942, Siemon William Muller delved into the relevant Russian literature held by the Library of Congress and the U.S. Geological Survey Library so that he was able to furnish the government an engineering field guide and a technical report about permafrost by 1943\",[8] year in which he coined the term as a contraction of permamently frozen ground.[9] Although originally classified (as U.S. Army. Office of the Chief of Engineers, Strategic Engineering Study, no. 62, 1943),[10][11][12][9] in 1947 a revised report was released publicly, which is regarded as the first North American treatise on the subject.[12][8] Extent[edit] Red lines: Seasonal temperature extremes (dotted=average). Permafrost is soil, rock or sediment that is frozen for more than two consecutive years. In areas not overlain by ice, it exists beneath a layer of soil, rock or sediment, which freezes and thaws annually and is called the \"active layer\".[13] In practice, this means that permafrost occurs at an mean annual temperature of \u22122\u00a0\u00b0C (28.4\u00a0\u00b0F) or colder. Active layer thickness varies with the season, but is 0.3 to 4 meters thick (shallow along the Arctic coast; deep in southern Siberia and the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau). The extent of permafrost varies with the climate: in the Northern Hemisphere today, 24% of the ice-free land area, equivalent to 19 million square kilometers,[14] is more or less influenced by permafrost. Of this area slightly more than half is underlain by continuous permafrost, around 20 percent by discontinuous permafrost, and a little less than 30 percent by sporadic permafrost.[15] Most of this area is found in Siberia, northern Canada, Alaska and Greenland. Beneath the active layer annual temperature swings of permafrost become smaller with depth. The deepest depth of permafrost occurs where geothermal heat maintains a temperature above freezing. Above that bottom limit there may be permafrost, whose temperature doesn't change annually\u2014\"isothermal permafrost\".[16] Continuity of coverage[edit] Permafrost typically forms in any climate where the mean annual air temperature is less than the freezing point of water. Exceptions are found in moist-wintered forest climates, such as in Northern Scandinavia and the North-Eastern part of European Russia west of the Urals, where snow acts as an insulating blanket. Glaciated areas may be exceptions. Since all glaciers are warmed at their base by geothermal heat, temperate glaciers, which are near the pressure-melting point throughout, may have liquid water at the interface with the ground and are therefore free of underlying permafrost.[17] \"Fossil\" cold anomalies in the Geothermal gradient in areas where deep permafrost developed during the Pleistocene persist down to several hundred metres. This is evident from temperature measurements in boreholes in North America and Europe.[18] Discontinuous permafrost[edit] Typically, the below-ground temperature varies less from season to season than the air temperature, with mean annual temperatures tending to increase with depth as a result of the geothermal crustal gradient. Thus, if the mean annual air temperature is only slightly below 0\u00a0\u00b0C (32\u00a0\u00b0F), permafrost will form only in spots that are sheltered\u2014usually with a northerly aspect\u2014creating discontinuous permafrost. Usually, permafrost will remain discontinuous in a climate where the mean annual soil surface temperature is between \u22125 and 0\u00a0\u00b0C (23 and 32\u00a0\u00b0F). In the moist-wintered areas mentioned before, there may not be even discontinuous permafrost down to \u22122\u00a0\u00b0C (28\u00a0\u00b0F). Discontinuous permafrost is often further divided into extensive discontinuous permafrost, where permafrost covers between 50 and 90 percent of the landscape and is usually found in areas with mean annual temperatures between \u22122 and \u22124\u00a0\u00b0C (28 and 25\u00a0\u00b0F), and sporadic permafrost, where permafrost cover is less than 50 percent of the landscape and typically occurs at mean annual temperatures between 0 and \u22122\u00a0\u00b0C (32 and 28\u00a0\u00b0F).[19] In soil science, the sporadic permafrost zone is abbreviated SPZ and the extensive discontinuous permafrost zone DPZ.[20] Exceptions occur in un-glaciated Siberia and Alaska where the present depth of permafrost is a relic of climatic conditions during glacial ages where winters were up to 11\u00a0\u00b0C (20\u00a0\u00b0F) colder than those of today. Continuous permafrost[edit] Estimated extent of alpine permafrost by region[21] Locality Area(\u00d71,000) Qinghai-Tibet Plateau 1,300\u00a0km2 (500\u00a0sq\u00a0mi) Khangai-Altai Mountains 1,000\u00a0km2 (390\u00a0sq\u00a0mi) Brooks Range 263\u00a0km2 (102\u00a0sq\u00a0mi) Siberian Mountains 255\u00a0km2 (98\u00a0sq\u00a0mi) Greenland 251\u00a0km2 (97\u00a0sq\u00a0mi) Ural Mountains 125\u00a0km2 (48\u00a0sq\u00a0mi) Andes 100\u00a0km2 (39\u00a0sq\u00a0mi) Rocky Mountains (US and Canada) 100\u00a0km2 (39\u00a0sq\u00a0mi) Fennoscandian mountains 75\u00a0km2 (29\u00a0sq\u00a0mi) Remaining <100\u00a0km2 (39\u00a0sq\u00a0mi) At mean annual soil surface temperatures below \u22125\u00a0\u00b0C (23\u00a0\u00b0F) the influence of aspect can never be sufficient to thaw permafrost and a zone of continuous permafrost (abbreviated to CPZ) forms. A line of continuous permafrost in the Northern Hemisphere[22] represents the most southerly border where land is covered by continuous permafrost or glacial ice. The line of continuous permafrost varies around the world northward or southward due to regional climatic changes. In the southern hemisphere, most of the equivalent line would fall within the Southern Ocean if there were land there. Most of the Antarctic continent is overlain by glaciers, under which much of the terrain is subject to basal melting.[23] The exposed land of Antarctica is substantially underlain with permafrost,[24] some of which is subject to warming and thawing along the coastline.[25] Alpine permafrost[edit] Estimates of the total area of alpine permafrost vary. Bockheim and Munroe[21] combined three sources and made the tabulated estimates by region, totaling 3,560,000\u00a0km2 (1,370,000\u00a0sq\u00a0mi). Alpine permafrost in the Andes has not been mapped.[26] Its extent has been modeled to assess the amount of water bound up in these areas.[27] In 2009, a researcher from Alaska found permafrost at the 4,700\u00a0m (15,400\u00a0ft) level on Africa's highest peak, Mount Kilimanjaro, approximately 3\u00b0 north of the equator.[28] Subsea permafrost[edit] Subsea permafrost occurs beneath the seabed and exists in the continental shelves of the polar regions.[4] These areas formed during the last ice age, when a larger portion of Earth's water was bound up in ice sheets on land and when sea levels were low. As the ice sheets melted to again become seawater, the permafrost became submerged shelves under relatively warm and salty boundary conditions, compared to surface permafrost. Therefore, subsea permafrost exists in conditions that lead to its diminishment. According to Osterkamp, subsea permafrost is a factor in the \"design, construction, and operation of coastal facilities, structures founded on the seabed, artificial islands, sub-sea pipelines, and wells drilled for exploration and production.\"[1] It also contains gas hydrates in places, which are both a \"potential abundant source of energy\", but also may destabilize, as subsea permafrost warms and thaws, producing large amounts of methane gas, which is a potent green-house gas.[1][29] Manifestations[edit] Time required for permafrost to reach depth at Prudhoe Bay, Alaska[30] Time (yr) Permafrost depth 1 4.44\u00a0m (14.6\u00a0ft) 350 79.9\u00a0m (262\u00a0ft) 3,500 219.3\u00a0m (719\u00a0ft) 35,000 461.4\u00a0m (1,514\u00a0ft) 100,000 567.8\u00a0m (1,863\u00a0ft) 225,000 626.5\u00a0m (2,055\u00a0ft) 775,000 687.7\u00a0m (2,256\u00a0ft) Base depth[edit] Permafrost extends to a base depth where geothermal heat from the Earth and the mean annual temperature at the surface achieve an equilibrium temperature of 0\u00a0\u00b0C.[31] The base depth of permafrost reaches 1,493\u00a0m (4,898\u00a0ft) in the northern Lena and Yana River basins in Siberia.[32] The geothermal gradient is the rate of increasing temperature with respect to increasing depth in the Earth's interior. Away from tectonic plate boundaries, it is about 25\u201330\u00a0\u00b0C/km (72\u201387\u00a0\u00b0F/mi) near the surface in most of the world.[33] It varies with the thermal conductivity of geologic material and is less for permafrost in soil than in bedrock.[31] Calculations indicate that the time required to form the deep permafrost underlying Prudhoe Bay, Alaska was over a half-million years.[30][34] This extended over several glacial and interglacial cycles of the Pleistocene and suggests that the present climate of Prudhoe Bay is probably considerably warmer than it has been on average over that period. Such warming over the past 15,000 years is widely accepted.[30] The table to the right shows that the first hundred metres of permafrost forms relatively quickly but that deeper levels take progressively longer. Massive ground ice[edit] Massive blue ground ice exposure on the north shore of Herschel Island, Yukon, Canada. When the ice content of a permafrost exceeds 250 percent (ice to dry soil by mass) it is classified as massive ice. Massive ice bodies can range in composition, in every conceivable gradation from icy mud to pure ice. Massive icy beds have a minimum thickness of at least 2 m and a short diameter of at least 10 m.[35] First recorded North American observations were by European scientists at Canning River, Alaska in 1919.[36] Russian literature provides an earlier date of 1735 and 1739 during the Great North Expedition by P. Lassinius and Kh. P. Laptev, respectively.[37] Two categories of massive ground ice are buried surface ice and intrasedimental ice[38] (also called constitutional ice).[37] Buried surface ice may derive from snow, frozen lake or sea ice, aufeis (stranded river ice) and\u2014probably the most prevalent\u2014buried glacial ice.[39] Intrasedimental ice forms by in-place freezing of subterranean waters and is dominated by segregational ice which results from the crystallizational differentiation taking place during the freezing of wet sediments, accompanied by water migrating to the freezing front.[37] Intrasedimental or constitutional ice has been widely observed and studied across Canada and also includes intrusive and injection ice.[36][37] Additionally, ice wedges\u2014a separate type of ground ice\u2014produce recognizable patterned ground or tundra polygons. Ice wedges form in a pre-existing geological substrate and were first described in 1919.[36][37] Several types of massive ground ice, including ice wedges and intrasedimental ice within the cliff wall of a retrogressive thaw slump located on the southern coast of Herschel Island within an approximately 22-metre (72\u00a0ft) by 1,300-metre (4,300\u00a0ft) headwall. Landforms[edit] Permafrost processes manifest themselves in large-scale land forms, such as palsas and pingos[40] and smaller-scale phenomena, such as patterned ground found in arctic, periglacial and alpine areas.[41] A group of palsas, as seen from above, formed by the growth of ice lenses. Pingos near Tuktoyaktuk, Northwest Territories, Canada Ground polygons Stone rings on Spitsbergen Ice wedges seen from top Solifluction on Svalbard Contraction crack (ice wedge) polygons on Arctic sediment. Cracks forming at the edges of the Storflaket permafrost bog in Sweden. Carbon cycle in permafrost[edit] The permafrost carbon cycle (Arctic Carbon Cycle) deals with the transfer of carbon from permafrost soils to terrestrial vegetation and microbes, to the atmosphere, back to vegetation, and finally back to permafrost soils through burial and sedimentation due to cryogenic processes. Some of this carbon is transferred to the ocean and other portions of the globe through the global carbon cycle. The cycle includes the exchange of carbon dioxide and methane between terrestrial components and the atmosphere, as well as the transfer of carbon between land and water as methane, dissolved organic carbon, dissolved inorganic carbon, particulate inorganic carbon and particulate organic carbon.[42] Climate change effects[edit] Arctic permafrost has been diminishing for many centuries. The consequence is thawing soil, which may be weaker, and release of methane, which contributes to an increased rate of global warming as part of a feedback loop. Historical changes[edit] Recently thawed Arctic permafrost and coastal erosion on the Beaufort Sea, Arctic Ocean, near Point Lonely, Alaska in 2013. At the Last Glacial Maximum, continuous permafrost covered a much greater area than it does today, covering all of ice-free Europe south to about Szeged (southeastern Hungary) and the Sea of Azov (then dry land)[43] and East Asia south to present-day Changchun and Abashiri.[44] In North America, only an extremely narrow belt of permafrost existed south of the ice sheet at about the latitude of New Jersey through southern Iowa and northern Missouri, but permafrost was more extensive in the drier western regions where it extended to the southern border of Idaho and Oregon.[45] In the southern hemisphere, there is some evidence for former permafrost from this period in central Otago and Argentine Patagonia, but was probably discontinuous, and is related to the tundra. Alpine permafrost also occurred in the Drakensberg during glacial maxima above about 3,000 metres (9,840\u00a0ft).[46][47] Thaw[edit] See also: Thermokarst Permafrost thaw ponds on peatland in Hudson Bay, Canada in 2008.[48] The ground can consist of many substrate materials, including bedrock, sediment, organic matter, water or ice. Frozen ground is that which is below the freezing point of water, whether or not water is present in the substrate. Ground ice is not always present, as may be the case with nonporous bedrock, but it frequently occurs and may be present in amounts exceeding the potential hydraulic saturation of the thawed substrate. By definition, permafrost is ground that remains frozen for two or more years. Since frozen soil, including permafrost, comprises a large percentage of substrate materials other than ice, it thaws rather than melts even as any ice content melts.[49] An analogy is when a freezer door is left open, although the ice in the freezer may change phase to a liquid, the food solids will not experience a phase change. In aggregate, the food thaws but does not melt. Melting implies the phase change of all solids to liquid. One visible sign of permafrost degradation is the random displacement of trees from their vertical orientation in permafrost areas.[50][51] As a consequence, precipitation has increased which in turn results in the weakening and eventual collapse of buildings in areas such as Norilsk in northern Russia, which lies upon the permafrost.[52] Effect on slope stability[edit] Over the past century, an increasing number of alpine rock slope failure events in mountain ranges around the world have been recorded. It is expected that the high number of structural failures is due to permafrost thawing, which is thought to be linked to climate change. Permafrost thawing is thought to have contributed to the 1987 Val Pola landslide that killed 22 people in the Italian Alps.[53] In mountain ranges, much of the structural stability can be attributed to glaciers and permafrost. As climate warms, permafrost thaws, which results in a less stable mountain structure, and ultimately more slope failures.[54] Increasing temperatures allow deeper active layer depths, resulting in increased water infiltration. Ice within the soil melts, causing loss of soil strength, accelerated movement, and potential debris flows.[55] McSaveney[56] reported massive rock and ice falls (up to 11.8 million m3), earthquakes (up to 3.9 Richter), floods (up to 7.8 million m3 water), and rapid rock-ice flow to long distances (up to 7.5\u00a0km at 60\u00a0m/s) caused by \u201cinstability of slopes\u201d in high mountain permafrost. Instability of slopes in permafrost at elevated temperatures near freezing point in warming permafrost is related to effective stress and buildup of pore-water pressure in these soils.[57] Kia and his co-inventors[58] invented a new filter-less rigid piezometer (FRP) for measuring pore-water pressure in partially frozen soils such as warming permafrost soils. They extended the use of effective stress concept to partially frozen soils for use in slope stability analysis of warming permafrost slopes. The use of effective stress concept has many advantages such as ability to extend the concepts of \"Critical State Soil Mechanics\" into frozen ground engineering. Ecological consequences[edit] In the northern circumpolar region, permafrost contains 1700 billion tons of organic material equaling almost half of all organic material in all soils.[14] This pool was built up over thousands of years and is only slowly degraded under the cold conditions in the Arctic. The amount of carbon sequestered in permafrost is four times the carbon that has been released to the atmosphere due to human activities in modern time.[59] One manifestation of this is yedoma, which is an organic-rich (about 2% carbon by mass) Pleistocene-age loess permafrost with ice content of 50\u201390% by volume.[60] Formation of permafrost has significant consequences for ecological systems, primarily due to constraints imposed upon rooting zones, but also due to limitations on den and burrow geometries for fauna requiring subsurface homes. Secondary effects impact species dependent on plants and animals whose habitat is constrained by the permafrost. One of the most widespread examples is the dominance of Black Spruce in extensive permafrost areas, since this species can tolerate rooting pattern constrained to the near surface.[61] One gram of soil from the active layer may include more than one billion bacteria cells. If placed along each other, bacteria from one kilogram of active layer soil will form a 1000\u00a0km long chain. The number of bacteria in permafrost soil varies widely, typically from 1 to 1000 million per gram of soil.[62] Most of these bacteria and fungi in permafrost soil can not be cultured in the laboratory, but the identity of the microorganisms can be revealed by DNA-based techniques. The Arctic region is one of the many natural sources of the greenhouse gas methane.[63] Global warming accelerates its release, due to both release of methane from existing stores, and from methanogenesis in rotting biomass.[64] Large quantities of methane are stored in the Arctic in natural gas deposits, permafrost, and as submarine clathrates. Permafrost and clathrates degrade on warming, thus large releases of methane from these sources may arise as a result of global warming.[65][66][67] Other sources of methane include submarine taliks, river transport, ice complex retreat, submarine permafrost and decaying gas hydrate deposits.[68] Preliminary computer analyses suggest that permafrost could produce carbon equal to 15 percent or so of today\u2019s emissions from human activities.[69] A hypothesis forwarded by Sergey Zimov is that the reduction of herds of large herbivores has increased the ratio of energy emission and energy absorption tundra (energy balance) in a manner that increases the tendency for net thawing of permafrost.[70] He is testing this hypothesis in an experiment at Pleistocene Park, a nature reserve in northeastern Siberia.[71] Predicted rate of change in the Arctic[edit] See also: Arctic methane release According to IPCC Fifth Assessment Report there is high confidence that permafrost temperatures have increased in most regions since the early 1980s. Observed warming was up to 3\u00a0\u00b0C in parts of Northern Alaska (early 1980s to mid-2000s) and up to 2\u00a0\u00b0C in parts of the Russian European North (1971\u20132010).[72] In Yukon, the zone of continuous permafrost might have moved 100 kilometres (62\u00a0mi) poleward since 1899, but accurate records only go back 30 years. It is thought that permafrost thawing could exacerbate global warming by releasing methane and other hydrocarbons, which are powerful greenhouse gases.[73][74][75] It also could encourage erosion because permafrost lends stability to barren Arctic slopes. Arctic temperatures are expected to increase at roughly twice the global rate.[76] The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) will in their fifth report establish scenarios for the future, where the temperature in the Arctic will rise between 1.5 and 2.5\u00a0\u00b0C by 2040 and with 2 to 7.5\u00a0\u00b0C by 2100. Estimates vary on how many tons of greenhouse gases are emitted from thawed permafrost soils. One estimate suggests that 110\u2013231 billion tons of CO2 equivalents (about half from carbon dioxide and the other half from methane) will be emitted by 2040, and 850\u20131400 billion tons by 2100.[59] This corresponds to an average annual emission rate of 4\u20138 billion tons of CO2 equivalents in the period 2011\u20132040 and annually 10\u201316 billion tons of CO2 equivalents in the period 2011\u20132100 as a result of thawing permafrost. For comparison, the anthropogenic emission of all greenhouse gases in 2010 is approximately 48 billion tons of CO2 equivalents.[77] Release of greenhouse gases from thawed permafrost to the atmosphere may increase global warming. Other issues[edit] The International Permafrost Association (IPA) is an integrator of issues regarding permafrost. It convenes International Permafrost Conferences, undertakes special projects such as preparing databases, maps, bibliographies, and glossaries, and coordinates international field programmes and networks. Among other issues addressed by the IPA are: Problems for construction on permafrost owing to the change of soil properties of the ground on which structures are placed and the biological processes in permafrost, e.g. the preservation of organisms frozen in situ. Construction on permafrost[edit] Building on permafrost is difficult because the heat of the building (or pipeline) can thaw the permafrost and destabilize the structure. Three common solutions include: using foundations on wood piles; building on a thick gravel pad (usually 1\u20132 metres/3.3\u20136.6 feet thick); or using anhydrous ammonia heat pipes.[78] The Trans-Alaska Pipeline System uses heat pipes built into vertical supports to prevent the pipeline from sinking and the Qingzang railway in Tibet employs a variety of methods to keep the ground cool, both in areas with frost-susceptible soil. Permafrost may necessitate special enclosures for buried utilities, called \"utilidors\". The Permafrost Research Institute in Yakutsk, found that the sinking of large buildings into the ground can be prevented by using pile foundations extending down to 15 metres (49\u00a0ft) or more. At this depth the temperature does not change with the seasons, remaining at about \u22125\u00a0\u00b0C (23\u00a0\u00b0F). Modern buildings in permafrost zones may be built on piles to avoid permafrost-thaw foundation failure from the heat of the building. Heat pipes in vertical supports maintain a frozen bulb around portions of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline that are at risk of thawing. Pile foundations in Yakutsk, a city underlain with continuous permafrost. District heating pipes run above ground in Yakutsk to avoid thawing permafrost. Revival of organisms preserved in permafrost[edit] In 2012, Russian researchers proved that permafrost can serve as a natural repository for ancient life forms by reviving of Silene stenophylla from 30,000 year old tissue found in an Ice Age squirrel burrow in the Siberian permafrost. This is the oldest plant tissue ever revived. The plant was fertile, producing white flowers and viable seeds. The study demonstrated that tissue can survive ice preservation for tens of thousands of years.[79] A 2016 outbreak of anthrax in the Yamal Peninsula is believed to be due to thawing permafrost.[80] See also[edit] Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost References[edit] ^ a b c Osterkamp, T. E. (2001), \"Sub-Sea Permafrost\", Academic Press: 2902\u201312 ^ Shiklomanov, Igor (1993), \"World fresh water resources\", in Gleick, Peter H., Water in Crisis: A Guide to the World's Fresh Water Resources, New York: Oxford University Press, archived from the original on 2014-03-10, retrieved 2014-03-02 ^ \"Frozen ground includes seasonally frozen ground and permafrost. The permafrost region occupies approximately 23 \u00d7 106 km2 or 24% of the land area in the NH [Northern Hemisphere].\" from Lemke et al, \"Observations: Changes in Snow, Ice and Frozen Ground\", IPCC WGI IV AR, 2007, pages 242-243. ^ a b Editors (2014). \"What is Permafrost?\". International Permafrost Association. Archived from the original on 2014-11-08. Retrieved 2014-11-08. ^ Margaret Kriz Hobson (December 1, 2016). \"Melting Permafrost Could Affect Weather Worldwide; It's not just releasing greenhouse gases\u2014it may also alter the ocean's chemistry and circulation patterns\". scientificamerican.com. Scientific American. Archived from the original on 2016-12-02. Retrieved December 2, 2016 \u2013 via ClimateWire. ^ Harvey, Fiona (21 February 2013). \"1.5C rise in temperature enough to start permafrost melt, scientists warn\". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 23 February 2013. Retrieved 23 February 2013. ^ Schuur, Ted (2016). \"Thawing Permafrost Would Accelerate Global Warming. Thawing Arctic tundra will likely speed up climate change for a century or more. The question is: How drastically?\". Scientific American. 315 (December 2016): 56\u201361. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican1216-56. PMID\u00a028004690. Archived from the original on 2016-12-02. Retrieved December 2, 2016. ^ a b Walker, H. Jesse (December 2010). \"Frozen in Time. Permafrost and Engineering Problems Review\". Arctic. 63 (4): 477. ^ a b Ray, Luis L. \"Permafrost - USGS [=United States Geological Survey] Library Publications Warehouse\" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-05-02. Retrieved November 19, 2018. ^ U.S. Geological Survey; United States. Army. Corps of Engineers. Strategic Intelligence Branch (1943). \"Permafrost or permanently frozen ground and related engineering problems\". Strategic Engineering Study (62): 231. OCLC\u00a022879846. ^ Occurrences on Google Books. ^ a b Muller, Siemon William (1947). Permafrost. Or, Permanently Frozen Ground and Related Engineering Problems. Ann Arbor, Michigan: Edwards. OCLC\u00a01646047. ^ Staff (2014). \"What is Permafrost?\". International Permafrost Association. Archived from the original on 2014-11-08. Retrieved 2014-02-28. ^ a b Tarnocai; et al. (2009). \"Soil organic carbon pools in the northern circumpolar permafrost region\". Global Biogeochemical Cycles. 23 (2): GB2023. Bibcode:2009GBioC..23.2023T. doi:10.1029/2008gb003327. ^ Heginbottom, J. Alan, Brown, Jerry; Humlum, Ole and Svensson, Harald; \u2018State of the Earth\u2019s Cryosphere at the Beginning of the 21st Century: Glaciers, Global Snow Cover, Floating Ice, and Permafrost and Periglacial Environments\u2019, p. A435 ^ Delisle, G. (2007). \"Near-surface permafrost degradation: How severe during the 21st century?\". Geophysical Research Letters. 34 (L09503): 4. Bibcode:2007GeoRL..34.9503D. doi:10.1029/2007GL029323. ^ Sharp, Robert Phillip (1988). Living Ice: Understanding Glaciers and Glaciation. Cambridge University Press. p.\u00a027. ISBN\u00a0978-0-521-33009-1. ^ Majorowicz, Jacek (2012), \"Permafrost at the ice base of recent pleistocene glaciations \u2013 Inferences from borehole temperatures profiles\", Bulletin of Geography. Physical Geography Series, Physical Geography Series, 5: 7\u201328, doi:10.2478/v10250-012-0001-x ^ Brown, Roger J.E.; P\u00e9w\u00e9, Troy L. (1973), \"Distribution of permafrost in North America and its relationship to the environment: A review, 1963\u20131973\", Permafrost: North American Contribution \u2013 Second International Conference, 2: 71\u2013100 ^ Robinson, S.D.; et al. (2003), \"Permafrost and peatland carbon sink capacity with increasing latitude\", in Phillips; et al., Permafrost (PDF), Swets & Zeitlinger, pp.\u00a0965\u2013970, ISBN\u00a090 5809 582 7, archived (PDF) from the original on 2014-03-02, retrieved 2014-03-02 ^ a b Bockheim, James G.; Munroe, Jeffrey S. (2014), \"Organic carbon pools and genesis of alpine soils with permafrost: a review\" (PDF), Arctic, Antarctic, and Alpine Research, 46 (4): 987\u20131006, doi:10.1657/1938-4246-46.4.987, archived (PDF) from the original on 2016-09-23, retrieved 2016-04-25 ^ Andersland, Orlando B.; Ladanyi, Branko (2004). Frozen ground engineering (2nd ed.). Wiley. p.\u00a05. ISBN\u00a0978-0-471-61549-1. ^ Zoltikov, I.A. (1962), \"Heat regime of the central Antarctic glacier\", Antarctica, Reports of the Commission, 1961 (in Russian): 27\u201340 ^ Campbell, Iain B.; Claridge, Graeme G. C. (2009), \"Antarctic Permafrost Soils\", in Margesin, Rosa, Permafrost Soils, Soil Biology, 16, Berlin: Springer, pp.\u00a017\u201331, doi:10.1007/978-3-540-69371-0_2, ISBN\u00a0978-3-540-69370-3 ^ Heinrich, Holly (July 25, 2013), \"Permafrost Melting Faster Than Expected in Antarctica\", National Public Radio, archived from the original on 2016-05-03, retrieved 2016-04-23 ^ Azocar, Guillermo (2014), Modeling of Permafrost Distribution in the Semi-arid Chilean Andes, Waterloo, Ontario: University of Waterloo, archived from the original on 2016-05-30, retrieved 2016-04-24 ^ Ruiz, Lucas; Liaudat, Dario Trombotto (2012), Mountain Permafrost Distribution in the Andes of Chubut (Argentina) Based on a Statistical Model (PDF), Tenth International Conference on Permafrost, Mendoza, Argentina: Instituto Argentino de Nivolog\u00eda Glaciolog\u00eda y Ciencias Ambientales, pp.\u00a0365\u2013370, archived (PDF) from the original on 2016-05-13, retrieved 2016-04-24 ^ Rozell, Ned (November 18, 2009), \"Permafrost near equator; hummingbirds near subarctic\", Capitol City Weekly, Juneau, Alaska ^ IPCC AR4 (2007). \"Climate Change 2007: Working Group I: The Physical Science Basis\". Retrieved April 12, 2014.CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link) ^ a b c Lunardini 1995, p.\u00a035 Table Dl. Freeze at Prudhoe Bay, Alaska. ^ a b Osterkamp, T.E.; Burn, C.R. (2014-09-14), \"Permafrost\", in North, Gerald R.; Pyle, John A.; Zhang, Fuqing, Encyclopedia of Atmospheric Sciences (PDF), 4, Elsevier, pp.\u00a01717\u20131729, ISBN\u00a0978-0123822260, archived (PDF) from the original on 2016-11-30, retrieved 2016-03-08 ^ Desonie, Dana (2008). Polar Regions: Human Impacts. New York: Chelsea Press. ISBN\u00a0978-0-8160-6218-8. ^ Fridleifsson, Ingvar B.; Bertani, Ruggero; Huenges, Ernst; Lund, John W.; Ragnarsson, Arni; Rybach, Ladislaus (2008-02-11). O. Hohmeyer and T. Trittin, ed. \"The possible role and contribution of geothermal energy to the mitigation of climate change\" (PDF). Luebeck, Germany: 59\u201380. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2013-03-12. Retrieved 2013-11-03. ^ Lunardini, Virgil J. (April 1995). \"Permafrost Formation Time\" (PDF). CRREL Report 95-8. Hanover NH: US Army Corps of Engineers Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory. p.\u00a018. ADA295515. Archived from the original on 2013-04-08. Retrieved 2012-03-03. ^ Mackay, J. Ross (1973), \"Problems in the origins of massive icy beds, Western Arctic, Canada\", Permafrost: North American Contribution \u2013 Second International Conference, 2: 223\u20138 ^ a b c French, H.M. (2007). The Periglacial Environment (3 ed.). Chichester: Wiley. ^ a b c d e Shumskiy, P.A.; Vtyurin, B.I. (1963), \"Underground ice\", Permafrost International Conference (1287): 108\u201313 ^ Mackay, J.R.; Dallimore, S.R. (1992), \"Massive ice of Tuktoyaktuk area, Western Arctic coast, Canada\", Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences, 29 (6): 1234\u201342, Bibcode:1992CaJES..29.1235M, doi:10.1139/e92-099 ^ Astakhov, 1986; Kaplanskaya and Tarnogradskiy, 1986; Astakhov and Isayeva, 1988; French, 1990; Lacelle et al., 2009 ^ Pidwirny, M (2006). \"Periglacial Processes and Landforms\". Fundamentals of Physical Geography. ^ Kessler MA, Werner BT (January 2003). \"Self-organization of sorted patterned ground\". Science. 299 (5605): 380\u20133. Bibcode:2003Sci...299..380K. doi:10.1126/science.1077309. PMID\u00a012532013. ^ McGuire, A.D., Anderson, L.G., Christensen, T.R., Dallimore, S., Guo, L., Hayes, D.J., Heimann, M., Lorenson, T.D., Macdonald, R.W., and Roulet, N. (2009). \"Sensitivity of the carbon cycle in the Arctic to climate change\". Ecological Monographs. 79 (4): 523\u2013555. doi:10.1890/08-2025.1. hdl:11858/00-001M-0000-000E-D87B-C.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Sidorchuk, Aleksey, Borisova Olga and Panin; Andrey; \u201cFluvial response to the late Valdai/Holocene environmental change on the East European plain\u201d Archived 2013-12-26 at the Wayback Machine ^ Yugo Ono and Tomohisa Irino; \u201cSouthern migration of westerlies in the Northern Hemisphere PEP II transect during the Last Glacial Maximum\u201d in Quaternary International 118\u2013119 (2004); pp. 13\u201322 ^ Malde, H.E.; \u201cPatterned Ground in the Western Snake River Plain, Idaho, and Its Possible Cold-Climate Origin\u201d; in Geological society of America Bulletin; v. 75 no. 3 (March 1964); pp. 191\u2013208 ^ Grab, Stefan; \u201cCharacteristics and palaeoenvironmental significance of relict sorted patterned ground, Drakensberg plateau, southern Africa\u201d in Quaternary Science Reviews, vol. 21, issues 14\u201315, (August 2002), pp. 1729\u20131744 ^ \"Inventory of fossil cryogenic forms and structures in Patagonia and the mountains of Argentina beyond the Andes\". South African Journal of Science, 98: 171\u2013180, Review Articles, Pretoria, Sud\u00e1frica. ^ Larry D. Dyke, Wendy E. Sladen (2010). \"Permafrost and Peatland Evolution in the Northern Hudson Bay Lowland, Manitoba\". ARCTIC. 63 (4). doi:10.14430/arctic3332. Archived from the original on 2014-08-10. Retrieved 2014-08-02.CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link) ^ Grosse, G.; Romanovsky, V.; Nelson, F.E.; Brown, J.; Lewkowicz, A.G. (March 2010). \"Why Permafrost Is Thawing, Not Melting\" (PDF). Eos, Transactions, American Geophysical Union. 91 (2): 87. Bibcode:2010EOSTr..91...87G. doi:10.1029/2010EO090003. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2011-08-15. Retrieved 2012-04-29. ^ Stevens, William K. (1998-08-18). \"Dead Trees and Shriveling Glaciers as Alaska Melts\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2007-12-26. Retrieved 2007-12-19. Here and there, roadside utility poles destabilized by the melting tilt at crazy angles. So do trees, creating a phenomenon known as drunken forest. ^ de Villiers, Marq (2001). Water: The Fate of Our Most Precious Resource. Boston: Mariner Books. ISBN\u00a0978-0-618-12744-3. \u2026caused what the locals call \"drunken forests,\" the trees tilting and leaning\u2026 ^ Luhn, Alec (2016-10-14). \"Slow-motion wrecks: how thawing permafrost is destroying Arctic cities\". The Guardian. ISSN\u00a00261-3077. Archived from the original on 2016-12-01. Retrieved 2016-12-01. ^ F., Dramis; M., Govi; M., Guglielmin; G., Mortara (1995-01-01). \"Mountain permafrost and slope instability in the Italian Alps: The Val Pola Landslide\". Permafrost and Periglacial Processes. 6 (1): 73\u201381. doi:10.1002/ppp.3430060108. ISSN\u00a01099-1530. ^ Huggel, C.; Allen, S.; Deline, P.; et al. (June 2012), \"Ice thawing, mountains falling; are alpine rock slope failures increasing?\", Geology Today, 28 (3): 98\u2013104, doi:10.1111/j.1365-2451.2012.00836.x ^ Darrow, M.; Gyswyt, N.; Simpson, J.; Daanen, R.; Hubbard, T.; et al. (May 2016), \"Frozen debris lobe morphology and movement: an overview of eight dynamic features, southern Brooks Range, Alaska\", The Cryosphere, 10 (3): 977\u2013993, Bibcode:2016TCry...10..977D, doi:10.5194/tc-10-977-2016, archived from the original on 2018-06-28, retrieved 2018-06-28 ^ McSaveney, M.J. (2002). Recent rockfalls and rock avalanches in Mount Cook national park, New Zealand. In Catastrophic landslides, effects, occurrence and mechanisms. Boulder: Geological Society of America, Reviews in Engineering Geology, Volume XV. pp.\u00a035\u201370. ISBN\u00a09780813758152. Archived from the original on 2018-01-28. Retrieved 2018-01-27. ^ Nater, P.; Arenson, L.U.; Springman, S.M. (2008). Choosing geotechnical parameters for slope stability assessments in alpine permafrost soils. In 9th international conference on permafrost. Fairbanks, USA: University of Alaska. pp.\u00a01261\u20131266. ISBN\u00a09780980017939. ^ Kia, Mohammadali; Sego, David Charles; Morgenstern, Norbert Rubin. \"FRP: Filter-less Rigid Piezometer for Measuring Pore-Water Pressure in Partially Frozen Soils\". Alpha Adroit Engineering Ltd. Alpha Adroit Engineering Ltd. Archived from the original on 2018-01-28. Retrieved 27 January 2018. ^ a b Schuur; et al. (2011). \"High risk of permafrost thaw\". Nature. 480 (7375): 32\u201333. Bibcode:2011Natur.480...32S. doi:10.1038/480032a. PMID\u00a022129707. ^ Walter KM, Zimov SA, Chanton JP, Verbyla D, Chapin FS (September 2006). \"Methane bubbling from Siberian thaw lakes as a positive feedback to climate warming\". Nature. 443 (7107): 71\u20135. Bibcode:2006Natur.443...71W. doi:10.1038/nature05040. PMID\u00a016957728. ^ C. Michael Hogan, Black Spruce: Picea mariana, GlobalTwitcher.com, ed. Nicklas Stromberg, November, 2008 Archived 2011-10-05 at the Wayback Machine ^ Hansen; et al. (2007). \"Viability, diversity and composition of the bacterial community in a high Arctic permafrost soil from Spitsbergen, Northern Norway\". Environmental Microbiology. 9 (11): 2870\u20132884. doi:10.1111/j.1462-2920.2007.01403.x. PMID\u00a017922769. \u2013 and additional references in this paper. Yergeau; et al. (2010). \"The functional potential of high Arctic permafrost revealed by metagenomic sequencing, qPCR and microarray analyses\". The ISME Journal. 4 (9): 1206\u20131214. doi:10.1038/ismej.2010.41. PMID\u00a020393573. ^ Bloom, A. A.; Palmer, P. I.; Fraser, A.; Reay, D. S.; Frankenberg, C. (2010). \"Large-Scale Controls of Methanogenesis Inferred from Methane and Gravity Spaceborne Data\" (PDF). Science. 327 (5963): 322\u2013325. Bibcode:2010Sci...327..322B. doi:10.1126/science.1175176. PMID\u00a020075250. ^ Walter, K. M.; Chanton, J. P.; Chapin, F. S.; Schuur, E. A. G.; Zimov, S. A. (2008). \"Methane production and bubble emissions from arctic lakes: Isotopic implications for source pathways and ages\". Journal of Geophysical Research. 113: G00A08. Bibcode:2008JGRG..11300A08W. doi:10.1029/2007JG000569. ^ Zimov, Sa; Schuur, Ea; Chapin, Fs, 3Rd (Jun 2006). \"Climate change. Permafrost and the global carbon budget\". Science. 312 (5780): 1612\u20133. doi:10.1126/science.1128908. ISSN\u00a00036-8075. PMID\u00a016778046.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Shakhova, Natalia (2005). \"The distribution of methane on the Siberian Arctic shelves: Implications for the marine methane cycle\". Geophysical Research Letters. 32 (9): L09601. Bibcode:2005GeoRL..32.9601S. doi:10.1029/2005GL022751. ^ Pfeiffer, Eva-Maria; Grigoriev, Mikhail N.; Liebner, Susanne; Beer, Christian; Knoblauch, Christian (April 2018). \"Methane production as key to the greenhouse gas budget of thawing permafrost\". Nature Climate Change. 8 (4): 309\u2013312. doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0095-z. ISSN\u00a01758-6798. ^ Shakhova, Natalia; Semiletov, Igor (2007). \"Methane release and coastal environment in the East Siberian Arctic shelf\". Journal of Marine Systems. 66 (1\u20134): 227\u2013243. Bibcode:2007JMS....66..227S. CiteSeerX\u00a010.1.1.371.4677. doi:10.1016/j.jmarsys.2006.06.006. ^ Gillis, Justin (December 16, 2011). \"As Permafrost Thaws, Scientists Study the Risks\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2017-05-19. Retrieved 2017-02-11. ^ S.A. Zimov, N.S. Zimov, A.N. Tikhonov, F.S. Chapin III (2012). \"Mammoth steppe: a high-productivity phenomenon\" (PDF). In: Quaternary Science Reviews, vol.\u00a057, 4\u00a0December\u00a02012, p.\u00a042\u00a0fig.17. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 17 October 2014.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Sergey A. Zimov (6 May 2005): \"Pleistocene Park: Return of the Mammoth's Ecosystem.\" Archived 2017-02-20 at the Wayback Machine In: Science, pages 796\u2013798. Article also to be found in www.pleistocenepark.ru/en/ \u2013 Materials. Archived 2016-11-03 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 5 May 2013. ^ \"Working Group I Contribution to the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report Climate Change 2013 - Summary for Policymakers - Template Lab\". 10 November 2015. Archived from the original on 2017-01-18. Retrieved 2017-01-16. ^ Sample, Ian (11 August 2005). \"Warming hits 'tipping point'\". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 2016-08-26. Retrieved 2016-12-12. ] ^ Schuur, E.A.G.; Vogel1, J.G.; Crummer, K.G.; Lee, H.; Sickman J.O.; Osterkamp T.E. (28 May 2009). \"The effect of permafrost thaw on old carbon release and net carbon exchange from tundra\". Nature. 459 (7246): 556\u20139. Bibcode:2009Natur.459..556S. doi:10.1038/nature08031. PMID\u00a019478781. Archived from the original on 2011-01-16. Retrieved 2010-11-17.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ \"Thaw point\". The Economist. 30 July 2009. Archived from the original on 2011-02-26. Retrieved 2010-11-17. ^ IPCC 2007. Summary for policy makers. In: Climate Change 2007: The physical basis. Working group I contribution to the fourth assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (eds. Solomon et al.). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. ^ UNEP 2011. Bridging the Emissions Gap. A UNEP Synthesis Report. 56 p. UNEP, Nairobi, Kenya ^ Clarke, Edwin S. (2007). Permafrost Foundations\u2014State of the Practice. Monograph Series. American Society of Civil Engineers. ISBN\u00a0978-0-7844-0947-3. ^ Isachenkov, Vladimir (February 20, 2012), \"Russians revive Ice Age flower from frozen burrow\", Phys.Org, archived from the original on 2016-04-24, retrieved 2016-04-26 ^ \"Anthrax Outbreak In Russia Thought To Be Result Of Thawing Permafrost\". Archived from the original on 2016-09-22. Retrieved 2016-09-24. External links[edit] Look up permafrost in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Permafrost. Permafrostwatch University of Alaska Fairbanks Infographics about permafrost International Permafrost Association (IPA) Center for Permafrost Map of permafrost in Antarctica. Permafrost \u2013 what is it? \u2013 YouTube (Alfred Wegener Institute) vtePeriglacial environmentLandforms Blockfield Bratschen Cryoplanation terrace Glacial erratic Paha Palsa Periglacial lake Pingo Protalus rampart Rock glacier Strandflat Glaciokarst Thermokarst Patterned ground Frost boil Polygons Solifluction lobes and sheets Sorted stripe Stone ring Processes Cryoplanation Cryosuction Cryoturbation Fluvio-thermal erosion Frost heave Frost weathering Gelifluction Ice segregation Methane release Nivation Solifluction Syngenetic permafrost growth Zero-curtain effect Soils and deposits Active layer Gelisols Ice wedge Loess Peat Permafrost Stratified slope deposit Talik Yedoma Biomes and ecotones Arctic tundra Arctic tree line Antarctic oasis Antarctic tundra Montane grasslands and shrublands Alpine tundra Alpine tree line (Massenerhebung effect) Taiga (Drunken trees) Climate Alpine Polar Subpolar Category:Periglacial landforms Template:Glaciers Authority control GND: 4129794-5 NDL: 00573185 Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Permafrost&oldid=888224086\" Categories: Arctic geography terminologyGeomorphologyMontane ecologyPatterned groundsPedologyPhysical geographyPermafrostWords coined in the 1940sHidden categories: CS1 Russian-language sources (ru)CS1 maint: Uses authors parameterCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWebarchive template wayback linksCommons category link is on WikidataWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with NDL identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces ArticleTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Afrikaans\u0627\u0644\u0639\u0631\u0628\u064a\u0629AsturianuB\u00e2n-l\u00e2m-g\u00fa\u0411\u0435\u043b\u0430\u0440\u0443\u0441\u043a\u0430\u044f\u092d\u094b\u091c\u092a\u0941\u0930\u0940\u0411\u044a\u043b\u0433\u0430\u0440\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0411\u0443\u0440\u044f\u0430\u0434Catal\u00e0\u0427\u04d1\u0432\u0430\u0448\u043b\u0430\u010ce\u0161tinaDanskDeutschEesti\u0395\u03bb\u03bb\u03b7\u03bd\u03b9\u03ba\u03acEspa\u00f1olEsperantoEuskara\u0641\u0627\u0631\u0633\u06ccFran\u00e7aisFryskGaeilgeGalego\ud55c\uad6d\uc5b4\u0540\u0561\u0575\u0565\u0580\u0565\u0576\u0939\u093f\u0928\u094d\u0926\u0940HrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaItaliano\u05e2\u05d1\u05e8\u05d9\u05ea\u10e5\u10d0\u10e0\u10d7\u10e3\u10da\u10d8\u049a\u0430\u0437\u0430\u049b\u0448\u0430Krey\u00f2l ayisyen\u041a\u044b\u0440\u0433\u044b\u0437\u0447\u0430Latvie\u0161uLietuvi\u0173LimburgsMagyarBahasa MelayuNederlands\u65e5\u672c\u8a9eNorskNorsk nynorskO\u02bbzbekcha/\u045e\u0437\u0431\u0435\u043a\u0447\u0430PolskiPortugu\u00easRom\u00e2n\u0103\u0420\u0443\u0441\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439\u0421\u0430\u0445\u0430 \u0442\u044b\u043b\u0430ScotsSimple EnglishSloven\u010dinaSloven\u0161\u010dina\u0421\u0440\u043f\u0441\u043a\u0438 / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / \u0441\u0440\u043f\u0441\u043a\u043e\u0445\u0440\u0432\u0430\u0442\u0441\u043a\u0438SuomiSvenska\u0ba4\u0bae\u0bbf\u0bb4\u0bcdT\u00fcrk\u00e7e\u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0441\u044c\u043a\u0430Ti\u1ebfng Vi\u1ec7t\u017demait\u0117\u0161ka\u4e2d\u6587 Edit links This page was last edited on 17 March 2019, at 19:09\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "Geology of southern African calcretes: 1. terminology, description, macrofeatures and classification. We use cookies to make interactions with our website easy and meaningful, to better understand the use of our services, and to tailor advertising. For further information, including about cookie settings, please read our Cookie Policy . By continuing to use this site, you consent to the use of cookies.Got ittopSee all \u203a64 CitationsDownload citationShare Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Google+ RedditRequest full-textGeology of southern African calcretes: 1. terminology, description, macrofeatures and classification.Article\u2002in\u2002Transactions - Geological Society of South Africa 83(2):255-283\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0January 1980\u2002with\u200265 ReadsCite this publication F. NetterbergAbstractCalcretes and other authigenic carbonate accumulations in the regolith in southern Africa are described in relation to their occurrence in the profile and their sequence of development. On the basis of secondary (chemical) structure, such materials can be classified in the field into calcareous soils, calcified soils, powder calcretes, glaebular calcretes, cutans, pedotubules, honeycomb calcretes, hardpan calcretes, calcrete boulders and calcrete cobbles. With simplification and addition of standard descriptors the classification is also suitable for geotechnical and other uses.-from AuthorDo you want to read the rest of this article?Request full-text Citations (64)References (0)... Within the red-bed succession on Spitsbergen, a variety of calcareous deposits are herein described as a part of the terrigenous ORS facies of Early Devonian age. Pedogenic, nodular calcretes have been classified by Beerbower (1964), Gile et al. (1966), Steel (1974), Allen (1974, 1986), Netterberg (1980) and Goudie (1983. Their occurrence is reported from various outcrops in different ORS basins, e.g.: from southern England (Allen 1974Allen , 1986 Leeder 1976; Parnell 1983; Wright et al. 1988), Scotland (Burgess 1961 ), the central Appalachians (Woodrow 1968; Allen & Friend 1968; Walker 1971) and from Spitsbergen ( Friend & Moody-Stuart 1970, 1972 Reed et al. 1987; Reed 1991; Lamar & Douglass 1995; Gebhardt et al. 2000). ...... The predominantly massive fabric of the host sediments particularly results from their fine-grained character , but also from intense organic destratification (bioturbation, pedoturbation), implying nodule formation in an oxygenated, near-surface palaeoenvironment . Tubular, partly downward-branching moulds are interpreted as animal burrows (Netterberg 1980) or root traces (Klappa 1980). Trace fossils associated with the calcretes have been interpreted as a proof of biological activity (Allen 1986). ...Calcareous, alluvial and lacustrine deposits in the Old Red Sandstone of central north Spitsbergen (Wood Bay Formation, Early Devonian)ArticleFull-text availableJan 2003NORW J GEOL Max Wisshak E Volohonsky Dierk Blomeier Michael M. JoachimskiWithin the silidelastic dominated red-bed strata of the Early Devonian Wood Bay Formation, various types of calcareous deposits, characterised by specific sedimentary structures, lithologies, microfacies, carbonate contents and stable isotope signatures, occur at different stratigraphie levels. Pedogenic, nodular calcretes with a thickness from 40 to 150 centimetres, associated with alluvial-plain and overbank sediments, represent palaeosol (calcisols, aridisols) development. The massive nodules show an internal mudstone fabric, calcium carbonate concentrations from 64 to 87 % and carbon and oxygen signatures of-5.3 to -6.4 and -8.5 to -9.9 \u2030, respectively. It is likely that they reflect a bio-induced carbonate precipitation in an oxygenated near-surface setting, connected with the evaporation of ground water. Single, up to some decimetres thick beds of calcareous mudstones and marls are characterised by a gradual colour change from reddish-brown to grey-violet upwards, and a meshwork of desiccation cracks at the top. The sediments show calcium carbonate concentrations from 22 to 43 % and carbon and oxygen isotope values ranging from -0.6 to -0.7 \u2030 and -7.6 to -8.8 \u2030, respectively. They are interpreted as deposits of relatively small, ephemeral lakes, formed by inorganic carbonate precipitation due to the evaporation of surface water. Individual beds and regressive, shallowing-upward sequences, up to a few metres thick, formed of calcareous mudstones to sandstones, marls to calcarenites and argillaceous to sandy limestones represent the depositional products of perennial, low-relief, low-energy lakes, These sediments yield carbonate concentrations from 20 to 81 % and a stable isotope composition of-2.1 to -3.1 %o for \u03b413C and -9.5 to -10.9 \u2030 for \u03b418O. They reflect deposition in basinal and littoral lacustrine and palustrine sub-environments, in which carbonate was formed due to inorganic, bio-induced and biotic precipitation. The different types of calcareous deposits formed under arid to semi-arid climatic conditions in various sub-environments of alluvial plains and perennial lakes. Their occurrence at different stratigraphie levels within the Wood Bay Formation can be related to a gradually increasing geomorphologic maturity of the terrestrial basin. The latter was marked by a decrease of the topographic relief and a lowering of sedimentation rates. An increase in landscape stability, combined with a general water-level rise led to the recurrent formation of broad lake plains in the centre of the basin.ViewShow abstract... In the Middle Triassic, palaeosol profiles are developed in red mudstones and siltstones (Fig. 1). Up to 19 different dolocretes in the Netterberg (1980) sense were recognised in no more than 20 m of the stratigraphic log (Fig. 5 ). Deposits of reworked palaeosol clasts are commonly incorporated into different profiles (Fig. 6A). ...... In the Middle Triassic, palaeosol profiles are developed in red mudstones and siltstones ( Fig. 1). Up to 19 different dolocretes in the Netterberg (1980) sense were recognised in no more than 20 m of the stratigraphic log ( Fig. 5). Deposits of reworked palaeosol clasts are commonly incorporated into different profiles ( Fig. 6A). ...Reworked calcretes: Their significance in the reconstruction of alluvial sequences (Permian and Triassic, Minorca, Balearic Islands, Spain)ArticleFull-text availableMay 2003SEDIMENT GEOL Ana M. Alonso-Zarza David G\u00f3mez-GrasThe Permian and Triassic of Minorca (Balearic Islands) consists of a 670-m-thick, red, alluvial succession that includes in situ calcrete profiles and reworked calcrete material. In the Permian succession, the calcretes vary from laminar forms developed on the Carboniferous basement to weakly developed nodular calcretes in fluvial sediments. The palaeosols in the Triassic are mostly dolomitic, and the profiles reach up to Stage III of soil development (Spec. Pap.-Geol. Surv. Am. 203, (1995) 1). The clasts, formed through reworking of the palaeosol profiles, are about 0.5\u201310 cm across and include mosaics of calcite/dolomite crystals, brecciated clasts, rhizolith fragments, and aggregates of clay and/or silt. These clasts appear in three different types of deposits. Type 1 corresponds to lenticular bodies that fill small scour surfaces, and consists only of intraformational conglomerates. These deposits are interpreted as ephemeral channels and sheet-floods that represent the interfluvial drainage systems that captured only the precipitation falling on the alluvial plain. Type 2 includes sand dune 3-D bodies with flat bottoms and convex tops. These bodies are about 20 cm high and 2 m wide, and were formed by floodwaters that flowed down the levees of the major streams. Type 3 channel deposits contain reworked calcretes and extrabasinal clasts, which overlie erosive surfaces and are found in layers within cross-bedded sandstones and conglomerates. These are interpreted as channel-floor lag deposits of major channels that entered from distant uplands and drained the alluvial plain.ViewShow abstract... karstic processes), making it somewhat weaker in the mass. Calcretes may range from calcified soils, calcium carbonate nodules or concretions, honeycomb calcretes (coalesced nodules) to mature hardpans ( Netterberg, 1980). Hardpans are typically 0.30.5 m thick, although superimposition of sequences of calcretes can create thick, complex profiles. ...Some near-surface desert features of significance in engineering geology evaluationsArticleFull-text availableSep 2013Q J ENG GEOL HYDROGE Edward Mark Lee Andrew B. Hart P. G. FookesIn most hot deserts Quaternary environmental changes have left their imprint on ground conditions, creating a legacy of materials that often reflect past as well as contemporary processes, and can appear unusual to geologists trained in temperate environments. Attention is drawn in this article to three near-surface features (duricrusts, palaeolakes and sulphate-rich soils) that reflect changing environmental conditions and that are of potential significance to engineering investigation, design and construction.ViewShow abstract... Finally, a third type of paleosol comprises dolocretes Mudflat carbonate occurs between lake margin dolo(in the sense of Netterberg, 1980) that developed close stone and open-lake carbonate that extends toward cento the lake margin facies (described below). This cartral parts of the basin ( Fig. 4). ...Sedimentology and geochemistry of carbonates from lacustrine sequences in the Madrid Basin, Central SpainArticleJun 1995CHEM GEOL Carol Kendall B.F. Jones J.P. Calvo Manuel BustilloLacustrine and alluvial carbonate facies have been investigated in Middle Miocene successions of the western side of the Madrid Basin in order to evaluate paleoenvironments in which carbonates formed. Carbonate facies are varied and include: (1) calcrete and dolocrete; (2) pond deposits; (3) lake margin dolostone; (4) mudflat carbonate; and (5) open-lake carbonate facies. The dominant mineralogy of these is dolomite and/or low-Mg calcite. No high-Mg calcite or aragonite have been detected in any sample. \u03b418O- and \u03b413C-values range from \u22128.20 to \u22121.80% PDB and \u221210.25 to \u22120.70% PBD, respectively. More negative \u03b418O- and \u03b413C-values correspond to predominantly calcite calcretes and to carbonate deposited in ponds at the foot of arkosic alluvium. Higher \u03b418O-values are from both lacustrine carbonate and dolocrete. This latter lithofacies has strong geochemical similarities to dolostones deposited in a lake margin environment. Mudflat carbonate, deposited on shallow platforms subject to lake water oscillation, shows great heterogeneity in both stable isotope value and trace-element content. The mineralogy of these carbonates is dominated by calcite and the limestones contain molds of gypsum. Occurrence of calcitized dolomite textures in these facies suggests the influence of fresher water during expanding lacustrine cycles or further interaction with less saline groundwater. Trace-element contents are considered to be potential indicators of the different carbonate facies types, thus aiding the paleoenvironmental interpretation. However, discrimination among carbonate facies on the basis of trace-element contents appears to be dependent on the statistical method utilized for treatment of data. More information is needed to ascertain their use as paleoenvironmental indicators.ViewShow abstract... The source of calcium carbonate in the calcrete deposits is not well understood but the calcrete deposits vary both laterally and vertically according to mode of formation, parent material and physical properties (Sulaimi 1988). Several classifications have been proposed, most of which have concentrated on either genesis, mineralogy or soil fabric, depending on the purpose of classification (Netterberg 1980; Netterberg and Caiger 1983). In Kuwait, a typical soil profile includes upper and lower uncemented soils with an intervening cemented horizon, which occurs in irregular and lenticular bands;Fig. ...Cone penetration resistance of calcareous sandArticleFull-text availableMar 2007B ENG GEOL ENVIRON Fathi ShaqourCalcareous sands form the foundation soils/structural fill for most of the engineering works in Kuwait, the Arabian Gulf countries and also act as structural fill. In situ calcareous sands are stronger than uncemented sand but lose much of their strength when re-worked or on wetting. The paper reports Dutch cone penetrometer tests on Jahra sand and Gatch under dry, wet and saturated conditions, using a specially designed sample box. The results showed that the penetration resistance (both tip and friction) of the uncemented sand increases upon wetting to an optimum with about a 70% increase from the dry, then decreases down to only 21% of the dry. With the calcareous sand, wetting was found to reduce the resistance in a directly proportional relationship, with a loss of resistance of 20% recorded at 7% water content and an 87% reduction when soaked. The friction ratio increased with increasing moisture content in uncemented sand but reduced to 50% in calcareous sands.ViewShow abstract... There is a very substantial literature on calcretes (e. g. Goudie 1973, Netterberg 1980, Wright & Tucker 1991, Milnes 1992, Paquet & Ruellan 1997, Watson & Nash 1997, Alonzo-Zarza 2003. A recent review by Wright (2007) reiterates the general perception that it forms at or near the landsurface but also includes description of groundwater calcrete which forms in some semi-arid to arid regions by precipitation in the shallow phreatic zone. ...An African surface weathering profile in the Kalahari of North West Ngamiland, Botswana: Processes and productsArticleFull-text availableSep 2010Z GEOMORPHOL Margaret Joan Mcfarlane Stephan Hermanus Coetzee Frank D. Eckardt S. RingroseA 128 m profile in the Kalahari of northwest Ngamiland, Botswana, is described. Textural, chemical and mineral characteristics of profile units were determined by XRF and ICP, EM, with EDAX, and XRD.Fifteen metres of aeolian sand overlies 14 m of residual sand, this overlying a saprolite profile. The parent bedrock was not reached but surviving primary minerals, quartz, feldspars and mica, indicate a crystalline rock. Within the saprolite there is up-profile depletion of Al and Fe and relative enrichment of carbonates, with maximum values directly below the residual sand.A model of profile development is presented. Quartz becomes rounded in situ by a process of progressive spalling of a thin layer of an (hydrated?) alteration product and is a relative accumulation. The carbonate-rich horizon is progressively enriched by repeated solution at the top of this profile unit and precipitation at the base, a process comparable to the relative accumulation of the silica-boxwork/garnierite horizon in Ni-laterite profiles.Fluvio-lacustrine Kalahari Sediments were not found, consistent with earlier deductions, based on remote sensing, that saprolite directly underlies the linear dune sand in North West Ngamiland. It is suggested that a shift in paradigm would resolve many outstanding problems regarding the origin of the Kalahari Sediments, i.e. a major part are autochthonous rather than allochthonousViewShow abstract... Calcretes are important components of semi-arid depositional systems and characteristic of regions experiencing a mean annual rainfall of around 500 mm ( Wright and Tucker, 1991). Therefore, calcretes are not only confined to soil profiles, when called pedogenic calcretes ( Netterberg, 1980;Machette, 1985;Wright and Tucker, 1991; Tandon and Gibling, 1997;Williams and Krause, 1998). They can also be formed, for instance, below the soil-forming zone, as groundwater or phreatic calcretes ( Wright and Tucker, 1991; Sp\u00f6tl and Wright, 1992;Rodas et al., 1994;Pimentel et al., 1996;Williams and Krause, 1998;Pimentel, 2002). ...Paleoweathering features in the Sergi Formation (Jurassic-Cretaceous), northeastern Brazil, and implications for hydrocarbon explorationArticleFull-text availableMar 2010J S AM EARTH SCI N. Pimentel Ana Maria P. Mizusaki Cristina Pierini Claiton Marlon dos Santos SchererPaleoweathering in the Sergi Formation has been classified and analyzed to ascertain its origin and relationship with stratigraphic evolution. The Sergi Formation belongs to the pre-rift sequence of the Rec\u00f4ncavo Basin (northeastern Brazil) and comprises a complex association of eolian and fluvial sandstones and lacustrine mudstones. This formation can be subdivided into three depositional sequences bounded by regional unconformities. Four paleoweathering types, each one related to a distinct origin, have been described in the Sergi Formation: (1) textural mottling, which is distinguished by alternating rock colors as a result of the iron oxide mobilization within mineral phases that evolved under alternating oxidation (yellowish, brownish and reddish shades) and reduction (grayish or greenish hues) conditions; (2) non-textural mottling, which displays a discoloration pattern that is independent of the original rock texture; (3) carbonate concentrations, usually related to carbonate nodule formation, which display a massive internal structure that reveals their origin through continuous growth or crystallization; and (4) banded carbonates (silicified), associated with the beginning of regular surface formation due to the chemical precipitation of carbonates within lacustrine environments. Both mottling color motifs and carbonate accumulation usually represent groundwater oscillation rather than pedogenesis. Only carbonate intraclasts and banded carbonate (silicified) have their origin ascribed to pedogenesis sensu stricto, although the carbonate intraclasts do not represent soil deposits in situ, but calcretes eroded from areas close to channels, and the banded carbonates (silicified) have strong diagenetic modifications. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that fluvial and meteoric water have controlled paleoweathering evolution as well as deposition, yet both aspects are ruled by the same mechanisms (relief, sedimentation rate and, above all, climate).ViewShow abstract... Sedimentary structures are rare and have obviously been affected by the pedogenic calcretisation process of the sands and gravels. This process, which not only alters the matrix diagenetically by carbonate replacement, also results in a significant increase in volume disturbing the original textures by physical expansion (Netterberg, 1980). Secondly and much later, small scale karstification ...The significance of the cretaceous diamondiferous gravel deposit at Mahura Muthla, Northern Cape province, South AfricaArticleFull-text availableDec 2009S AFR J GEOL J. D. Ward M.J. ROBERTS MichielC.J. de Wit Marion BamfordRemnants of diamond-bearing fluvial gravels of Cretaceous age have been preserved on the Ghaap Plateau north-west of Reivilo at 1455 m above sea level. The alluvial deposit contains well preserved fossil woods representing at least four periods: Post-Permian (Upper Karoo), Early Cretaceous, Late Cretaceous and Tertiary. The Karoo specimen has been derived from Beaufort Group sediments, now eroded from the Ghaap Plateau. More significant are the presence of Early and Late Cretaceous woods, both periods believed to have been wetter in the interior of southern Africa. In addition to the diamonds, other kimberlite derived minerals such as ilmenite and garnet have also been recovered from these gravels. Detailed mineral chemical analyses of the ilmenites and those occurring in primary sources within a radius of 120 km of the Mahura Muthla area indicate that the most likely source are kimberlites occurring to the south-south-east, indicating that the palaeo-channel was flowing from the south-east to the north-west. This is supported by the presence of ironstone and red chert cobbles and pebbles derived from the Proterozoic Kanguru Member outcropping directly south of the channel. Further evidence conies from a palaeo-tributary on Laurika which joined the main Mahura Muthla trunk stream from the south-west; limited pebble imbrications; and a decrease in the sizes of wood, agate and ironstone cobbles and pebbles in a northerly direction associated with an increase of roundness of these clasts. At the start of the Cretaceous the area was covered by sandstones of the Beaufort Group with overlying flood basalts of the Drakensberg Group. First during the Early Cretaceous the Mahura Muthla channel was incising into an easterly retreating palaeo-escarpment of Karoo basalts. Group 2 kimberlites such as Finch. Dadeston and Duivelskop, had already intruded these basalts around :120Ma. The north-westerly orientated drainage was directly linked to the drainage basin of the Kalahari River draining the northern part of the northern Cape and southern Botswana via the palaeo-Molopo and lower Orange River. This period of erosion would have released an abundance of agates from the basalts that are so abundantly present in the gravels and also diamonds from these Group 2 kimberlites. On comparing the mineral chemistry of the ilmenites the most likely source for these kimberlitic minerals is the area to the south east of Mahura Muthla. Kimberlites occurring in this area include the Duivelskop Group, X 154, Pienaarspoort, the Bellsbank Group, Bull Hill and Mayeng. At least some of these could have provided diamonds to the gravels. Later during Upper Cretaceous times the Karoo basalts had been removed and the drainage stripped the remaining sediments of the Beaufort Group before the sinuous channel became locked and preserved within the Transvaal dolomites. Subsequently the channel became calcretised during the development of the African Surface in the Early Tertiary. Mahura Muthla remained part of the Kalahari River basin which fed the Molopo River and the lower Orange drainage network and by the Early Tertiary the latter had captured the Vaal and the upper and middle Orange River drainage basin which had been part of the Karoo River drainage for most of the Cretaceous.ViewShow abstract... It is interpreted as representing a change from a marine to a terrestrial source of carbonate, precipitated from water of meteoric origin which was capable of perfusing and replacing the as yet unconsolidated silt when the area became tidal to sub-tidal during marine regression. Negative values for 6' 3C down to < -1 O%o are observed in terrestrial pedogenic carbonate (calcretes ) in southern Africa (Mazor et al., 1974; Netterberg, 1980). The partially parallel negative excursion in 6 \" 0 can similarly be interpreted as due to the dominance of meteoric water during at least part of this period of inferred marine regression . ...Implications of isotopic and other geochemical data from a Cretaceous-Tertiary transition in southern AfricaArticleOct 1990Chem Geol Isot Geosci Balthazar Verhagen Mahiban Lindsay Nesayyan Marian Tredoux Christian KoeberlIsotopic, palaeontological and geochemical details of a drill-core section at Richard's Bay, South Africa, are reported. Foraminiferal evidence shows that the section encompasses a transition from the Maastrichtian to the Danian, one of the very few sites in the Southern Hemisphere on land. The carbon isotope profile of the carbonate fraction shows a large negative excursion at the transition. The corresponding oxygen isotope excursion is largely parallel but less pronounced. It is argued that this Cretaceous-Tertiary (K/T) boundary is characterised by strong and well-identified local influences, seen in the mineralogy, in trace-element data, and in partially parallel carbon and oxygen isotopic signals. A possible scenario is presented in which marine regression is accompanied by increased influence of terrestrial material in this lagoonal environment. This could point towards similar, if often less pronounced, influences in some other well-documented K/T sites.ViewShow abstract... The term calcrete is synonymous with caliche, croutes calcaires, nari and The region taken up for detailed study falls in the state of Gujarat, western India, and is enclosed kunkar. Calcretes are understood to form through soil-forming (pedogenic) (Netterberg, 1980; between latitudes 22\u00b050\u221eN and 23\u00b045\u221eN and longitudes 72\u00b045\u221eE and 74\u00b0E ( Fig. 1). Tandon and Friend, 1989; Wright and Tucker, 1991; Tandon and Gibling, 1997; Zaleha, 1997; The state of Gujarat comes under the influence of the Southwest Indian Monsoon. ...The character and genesis of calcrete in Late Quaternary alluvial deposits, Gujarat, western India, and its bearing on the interpretation of ancient climatesArticleOct 2000PALAEOGEOGR PALAEOCL Rengaswamy Ramesh Aniruddha Khadkikar L. S. ChamyalLate Quaternary deposits in Mainland Gujarat contain sediments deposited in subhumid and semi-arid climates. The 30\u201335 m succession shows the presence of Vertisols at the base and a red-bed horizon (ferric Calcisol when pedogenic in origin) that roughly bisects the succession. A widespread development of calcretes is observed throughout the succession. The various varieties of calcrete include pedogenic calcrete, groundwater calcrete, calcrete conglomerate (transported calcrete) and rhizogenic calcrete. Pedogenic calcrete nodules associated with Vertisols and the red-soil show marked differences in morphology, dimensions and the distribution of microscopic features. These differences arise due to contrasting climate-controlled physicochemical environs under which they formed. Pedogenic calcrete nodules associated with Vertisols acquire large (5\u201310 cm) dimensions and are characterised by either showing the presence of a nucleus of soil-matter or showing a dense micritic groundmass cut by thick sparitic veins. In contrast, calcrete nodules that formed in the red-soil are <3 cm in size and do not exhibit dense networks of sparitic veins. Calcretes associated with Vertisols and the ferric Calcisol also exhibit differences in the morphology of rhizoliths. These differences also show up in the distribution of microfabrics of calcretes. Grain coats are present in rhizogenic and pedogenic calcretes, but absent in groundwater calcretes and less profuse in hydromorphic soil calcretes. Clotted micrite is present in all types except groundwater calcretes. Sparitic veins, however, are observed in each type, but are relatively less developed in groundwater calcretes. A similar distribution of displacive and replacive textures is also seen, although some grains in groundwater calcretes showed signs of corrosion. The Vertisol-associated calcretes represent a subhumid (500\u2013700 mm) climate, whereas the red-soil calcretes suggest a semi-arid (100\u2013500 mm) climate. Calcretes from the Vertisol association show a range in \u03b413C composition constrained between \u22129\u2030 and \u22125\u2030, whereas the red-soil calcretes exhibit the whole spectrum of values from \u22129\u2030 to \u22121\u2030. Based on mineralogical associations, calcretes, usually taken to reflect semi-arid episodes in the Earth's history, may be classified further. Calcretes, when associated with sepiolite/palygorskite, suggest an arid climate (mean annual rainfall=50\u2013100 mm), when associated with smectite, haematite and the absence of hydromorphism, a semi-arid climate (mean annual rainfall=100\u2013500 mm), and when found in smectitic Vertisols, subhumid climates (mean annual rainfall=500\u2013700 mm).ViewShow abstractMapping calcretes in Inhambane province, Mozambique, for use in road constructionArticleMay 2014B ENG GEOL ENVIRON Gareth HearnCalcretes have been used extensively in southern Africa, and elsewhere, for low-volume road construction. In Inhambane province of Mozambique, naturally occurring gravels are rare and calcrete is used wherever it is known to occur in reasonable proximity to the road network. While considerable research and development has been undertaken in Botswana, Namibia, and South Africa on the prospecting and engineering usage of calcrete, little work has been undertaken in Mozambique. Remote sensing and field probing, followed by trial pitting and laboratory testing were undertaken in order to locate hitherto unknown deposits of calcrete and to test its basic engineering properties for use in road construction. The findings from other parts of southern Africa were examined in terms of their applicability to Inhambane province, and the locations of existing calcrete borrow pits were examined to determine whether they had common geographical attributes that could assist in the identification of new sources. The study led to the discovery of approximately 20 locations of calcrete potential. Thirteen of these were investigated using trial pits, and ten of these yielded calcrete. A list of additional sites within the vicinity of the road network was developed from remote sensing. The occurrence of calcrete appears to be quite localised within the province and its location is governed by very subtle changes in topography and drainage regime, some of which may be inherited from past climate and environmental factors that are no longer apparent.ViewShow abstractCalcreteChapterMay 2008 V. Paul WrightThis chapter contains section titled:ViewShow abstractSoil-landscape relationship in the Middle Miocene of the Madrid BasinArticleFeb 1992Sedimentology Ana M. Alonso-Zarza J.P. Calvo WRIGHT M. \u00c1ngeles Garc\u00eda- -del-CuraThe Miocene alluvial-lacustrine sequences of the Madrid Basin, Spain, formed in highly varied landscapes. The presence of various types of palaeosols allows assessment of the effects of local and external factors on sedimentation, pedogenesis and geomorphological development. In the northern, more arid, tectonically active area, soils were weakly developed in aggrading alluvial fans, dominated by mass flows, reflecting high sedimentation rates. In more distal parts of the fans and in playa lakes calcretes and dolocretes developed; the former were associated with Mg-poor fan sediments while the latter formed on Mg-rich lake clays exposed during minor lake lowstands. The north-east part of the basin had a less arid climate. Alluvial fans in this area were dominated by stream flood deposits, sourced by carbonate terrains. Floodplain and freshwater lake deposits formed in distal areas. The high local supply of calcium carbonate may have contributed to the preferential development of calcretes on the fans. Both the fan and floodplain palaeosols exhibit pedofacies relationships and more mature soils developed in settings more distant from the sediment sources. Palaeosols also developed on pond and lake margin carbonates, and led to the formation of palustrine limestones. The spatial distributions and stratigraphies of palaeosols in the Madrid Basin alluvial fans suggest that soil formation was controlled by local factors. These palaeosols differ from those seen in Quaternary fans, which are characterized by climatically induced periods of stability and instability.ViewShow abstractA hydrological model for palygorskite formation in the Danian continental facies of the Provence Basin (France).ArticleFull-text availableJun 1998CLAY MINER Jelena Colson M\u00e9dard Thiry Isabelle CojanThe Danian of the Provence basin (SE France) is characterized by a strong subatmospheric alteration processes throughout the basin. A wide range of facies, depositional and weathering, were recognized in an interval of 5 Myr and include floodplain fine-grained alluvium, palustrine limestones, playa dolostones, mottled palaeosols, vadose and phreatic calcretes, and phreatic dolocretes. Palygorskite was invariably found in laminar, massive and honeycomb vadose calcretes and phreatic dolocretes, as well as in playa dolostones, and only exceptionally in floodplain siltstones, nodular calcretes and palustrine limestones. Regardless of the facies, palygorskite is associated with smectites. An authigenic origin, based on the morphology of the fibres and the vertical distribution of clay minerals, is proposed for palygorskites in all of the facies. The simultaneous occurrence of palygorskite in these environments is interpreted as a sign of a stable seasonal semi-arid climate and low detrital input during a period of low lake level (~0.5 Myr). The occurrence of authigenic palygorskite in siltstones around the lake was attributed to the rising of the water table, retention of the already saturated water in the pore spaces of the sediment, and its subsequent evaporation in a confined environment. A hydrogeological model is proposed for the distribution of palygorskite. The elongated shape of the Provence basin enhanced the influence of lateral inflow of freshwater during the low lake period which explains the distribution of palygorskite in different environments of the Provence basin as well as spatial distribution of phreatic calcretes and dolocretes. During the high lake level, palygorskite formed in the few remaining ephemeral ponds and on the floodplain along the lake margin.ViewShow abstractSedimentology and stratigraphy of upper Miocene deposits from the transverse valleys of La Pampa province, ArgentinaArticleDec 2013 Florencia R Lorenzo A.E. Mehl Marcelo Z\u00e1rateSedimentology and stratigraphy of upper Miocene deposits from the transverse valleys of La Pampa province, Argentina. In the distal foreland region of central Argentina the Mio-Pliocene continental record is widely distributed (Fig. 1a, Folguera and Z\u00e1rate, 2009). In La Pampa province it is represented by the Cerro Azul Formation (Fm) (Linares et al., 1980; Visconti, 2007) that involves the lapse between ca. 12-11? Ma and 5.8 Ma (Verzi and Montalvo, 2008; Folguera and Z\u00e1rate, 2009). This lithostratigraphical unit crops out along the walls and floors of the transversal valleys (Calmels, 1996) situated in the central-eastern sector of La Pampa province. The deposits are blanketed by aeolian silty sands and sandy silts mantles which together with the sand dunes systems usually located along the transversal valleys are considered of Late Pleistocene-Holocene age (Z\u00e1rate y Tripaldi, 2012). According to Visconti (2007) the outcrops of the Cerro Azul Fm consist of lacustrine, aeolian and fluvial facies. The lacustrine facies, made up of laminated claystones and sandy siltstones to very fine sandstones, have been stratigraphically placed at the base of the Formation. However, field work allowed recognizing the existence of similar deposits making up comparable geoforms at different absolute altitudes in several transversal valleys. This paper is focused on the sedimentological characteristics of these deposits and questions their stratigraphic position. Based on the observations and previous work, three working hypothesis are considered: the deposits are the oldest exposed stratigraphic sections of the Cerro Azul Fm as already stated; the deposits post date the valleys formation, hence they were accumulated within the valleys; the deposits represent similar and diachronic sedimentary settings during the accumulation of the Cerro Azul Formation. The study consisted of a sedimentological-pedological description and sampling coupled with the geomorphological analysis of the deposits at several localities in different transversal valleys of La Pampa (Fig. 1b). Textural, mineralogical (X-Ray difractometry) and micromorphological analyses of thin sections were carried at selected samples. A lithofacies approach was used to describe the deposits resulting in the identification lithofacies (Table 1) and facies associations following Miall's (2006) proposal, with a partially modified lithofacies code. Interpretations were made following Miall (2006), Reading (1996) and Nichols (2009). Two main geomorphic systems (SE1 and SE2) of different altitude are identified in the Nerec\u00f3, Hucal, Quehu\u00e9 and Chapalc\u00f3 valleys (Figs. 1b, 2a) resulting in a characteristic stepped topography. The deposits under study compose the SE2 with a relative height between 2 and 5 m above the valley floor, surrounding the deepest part of them; the lower stratigraphic contact remains unexposed. They are made up of unconsolidated sandy silt, silt and, secondarily, silty fine sand, either massive or with rare planar laminar bedding at some localities, while a dominant angular blocky structure is present at exposed sections. In some exposures, the deposits under study are featured by the occurrence of cutans and slickensides. Calcium carbonate is commonly present as powdery accumulations, nodules and concretions. The organic matter content varies from 0.03 to 1.17 %. At some levels the deposits exhibit layers of darker colors and higher concentration of organic matter with subprismatic secondary structure when dried. According to the grain-size and primary and secondary structures several lithofacies have been identified: Afm(f), Afb, Lab(c), Lab(mf), Lam(i), Lb(fc), Lal, Lab(cP), Afb(mfP) (Table 1), which were grouped into two main facies, A and B. Facies A represents abandoned channels of low relief and nonchannelized areas linked to low energy ephemeral streams/flows transporting sediments to the deepest part of the landscape. Facies B is interpreted as a paludal-like setting corresponding to poorly drained low energy aggradational environments. Both facies are gathered into facies association 1 (FA1), recognized in all the studied localities. It is interpreted as the record of low energy ephemeral fluvial and paludal-like environments, including episodes of higher water inputs linked to heavy rain events. This together with the geomorphological setting of the deposits suggests the occurrence of an aggradational process of low energy during the late Miocene in the interior of the valleys once they were already formed. Keywords: Ephemeral fluvial deposits; Cerro Azul Formation; Transverse valleys; Late Miocene; La Pampa; Argentina.ViewShow abstractMessinian to Pliocene transition in the deep part of the Sorbas Basin, SE Spain - A new description of the depositional environment during the Messinian Salinity CrisisArticleFull-text availableFeb 2011Neues Jahrbuch Geol Palaontol Abhand Anne Aufgebauer Tom McCannThe extent, timing and effects of the Late Miocene desiccation of the Mediterranean Sea during the period of the Messinian Salinity Crisis (5.96-5.33 Ma) remain controversial. In the Betic Cordillera of southeast Spain, close to the present-day Mediterranean, the Neogene Sorbas Basin contains one of the most complete sedimentary successions of this period. Recent work in the basin was mainly concentrated on the area around the town of Sorbas and the village of Cariatiz, both located along the Messinian palaeomargin of the basin. The present study presents a first detailed description of the sediments with precise facies reconstructions in the deepest part of the Sorbas Basin. The sediments are predominatly siltstones and sandstones, and belong to the Messinian Sorbas Member (5.67-5.5 Ma) and the Messinian to Pliocene Zorreras Member (5.5-5.33 Ma). It has been suggested that the fine-grained marine silt- and sandstones of the distal Sorbas Member show evidence of repeated fluctuations of sea level and restricted hypersaline conditions in the basin. The overlying continental silt- and sandstones of the Zorreras Member show evidence of intensive soil development processes. The uppermost part of this member contains high-energy marine sediments. We would strongly argue that both members were deposited during the main desiccation phase of the MSC, when the Sorbas Basin was cut off from the, at least partially, dried up Mediterranean Sea, and a reestablishment of normal marine conditions across the basin in early Pliocene.ViewShow abstractThe behaviour of uranium, thorium and tin during leaching from a coarse-grained porphyritic granite in an arid environmentArticleMay 1986J GEOCHEM EXPLOR C. FrickDuring the routine analysis of chip samples from water boreholes it was noted that the DeBakken granite south of Kenhardt has high uranium and tin contents. Rock samples collected on surface, however, revealed low concentrations of both these elements indicating that they have been leached from the surface samples. The distribution of thorium in the borehole profiles showed that while both tin and uranium have been removed above the water table, other \u201cimmobile\u201d elements and thorium remained unaffected.ViewShow abstractEarly diagenetic spherulitic siderites from Pennsylvanian palaeosols in the Boss Point Formation, Maritime CanadaArticleJun 2006Sedimentology G. H. BROWNE D. M. KingstonThe Boss Point Formation of Maritime Canada comprises alternating successions of braidplain sandstone, lacustrine mudstone, and lacustrine fluvio-deltaic sandstone and mudstone. These rocks were deposited within an active strike-slip basin during the early Pennsylvanian (Westphalian A), at a palaeolatitude of 8\u00b0S. Palaesols comprise a small but distinct proportion of the formation, and typically occur at the tops of fining upward sandstone-siltstone cycles. Spherulitic siderites from the Boss Point Formation occur within sandy and silty palaeosols. They occur as \u2018large\u2019 (>200 \u03bcm) and \u2018small\u2019 (<200 \u03bcm) diameter spherulitic nodules within calcrete, and show either a radially arranged ferroan calcite and siderite spar morphology, or contain a core of ferroan calcite, surrounded by a later formed sheath of siderite. Analytical data indicate that with respect to Ca-Mg-Mn, wide compositional variation occurs within the siderites. The Boss Point Formation siderites are similar to, but contain less Ca for a given Mg/Mn ratio, than previously published siderite compositional data. Published data, together with the results from the Boss Point Formation, indicate that a continuum exists in freshwater siderites, between the relatively Mn-depleted and the Mg-enriched analytical fields that were previously reported. The relatively low Ca values determined in the Boss Point Formation samples reflect the general lack of calcium in the sedimentary basin during sedimentation. Both chlorite and smectite clays may have been important sources of iron. It is concluded that the spherulitic siderites are eogenetic, and formed within small anoxic ponds rich in organic matter, under reducing and low dissolved sulphate conditions. With time these pools dried up, ferroan calcite precipitating as calcrete nodules around the earlier formed siderite spherulites.ViewShow abstractThe nature of calcareous deposits along pan margins in eastern Central NamibiaArticleJul 2002 Florias MeesIn a region along the western margin of the Kalahari in eastern Namibia and western Botswana, many pan basins have mainly calcareous deposits along part of their margins. These are typically lined by low vertical scarps. In Namibia, these pans are mainly located in dry river beds. The petrographical study of these deposits demonstrates that they consist of lacustrine sediments that have to a varying extent been affected by early-diagenetic processes and by the formation of late-diagenetic features. The original composition of the deposits ranges from highly calcareous sediments, typically with ostracod, diatom and charophyte remains, to entirely non-calcareous diatomites. The deposits generally show an upward increase in total carbonate content, which is mainly a synsedimentary feature. The early-diagenetic processes that affected the deposits include the formation of orthic siliceous nodules. At a later stage, secondary calcite enrichment occurred, leaving only the silica-impregnated sections unaffected. This enrichment partly accounts for the upward increase in total carbonate content in some profiles and often resulted in the development of a highly calcareous surface horizon. Sepiolite and amorphous silica that are part of the groundmass of the deposits may also partly have formed at this stage. Late-diagenetic features include various forms of secondary calcite and silica. This study of pan basins in eastern central Namibia indicates that a lacustrine rather than purely pedogenic origin should also be considered for calcareous deposits that commonly occur along pan margins in other parts of southern Africa. CopyrightViewShow abstractGroundwater dolocretes in a lake-marginal environment: An alternative model for dolocrete formation in continental settings (Danian of the Provence Basin, France)ArticleJun 2006Sedimentology Jelena Colson Isabelle CojanIn the long continental history of the Provence Basin which extended from Santonian to Oligocene times, a major period of palaeosol development occurred in the Danian. Dolocretes developed within floodplain silts, and partly from palustrine limestones. Dolocretes are overlain by pedogenic facies: calcretes and palustrine limestones. Gradational lower and upper limits of profiles, succession of nodular, coalescent and massive horizons, the epigenesis of quartz by dolomite, the unimodal crystal size and the euhedral dolomite fabric, as well as the absence of biogenic structures and vadose cements show that dolocretes formed in the phreatic zone. The exclusive occurrence of dolocretes around the palaeolake or playa suggests that dolocrete formed by the mixing of groundwaters and lake brines, which infiltrated the phreatic zone during periods of strong evaporation and lake level lowering. The term halo dolocrete is proposed to describe this type of dolocrete deposit. Subsequent alteration of the dolocrete includes leaching of the central core of dolomite crystals and calcitization. Calcitization was either fabric-destructive (type I) or fabric-preserving (type II) and took place during very early diagenesis, i.e. concomitant with calcrete formation or palustrine limestone deposition. Fabric-destructive calcitization is attributed to a drop in the lake level, when the upper part of the dolocrete was subjected to vadose zone processes, whereas the fabric-preserving calcitization resulted from reactions with dilute lake and groundwaters during rise in lake level.ViewShow abstractajpa22272DataFull-text availableMay 2013 Stephanie Edwards Baker Colin G Menter Andy I R Herries Philip J. HopleyViewOrigin and palaeo-environments of calcareous sediments in the Moshaweng Dry Valley, Southeast BotswanaArticleJun 2002 B. W. Vink A.B. Kampunzu William Samuel Downey S. RingroseQuaternary sedimentation in the Moshaweng dry valley of southeastern Botswana is evaluated on the basis of geomorphological evolution and sedimentological analyses. Stratigraphic evidence reveals an upper surface (1095 m) containing abundant sil-calcrete, an intermediate surface (1085 m) in which sil-calcrete underlies nodular calcrete and lower (1075 m) surface in which sil-calcrete and nodular calcrete are interbedded. This subdivision is reflected in the geochemical composition of the sediments which show an overall trend of decreasing SiO2 content (and increasing CaCO3 content) with depth from the highest to the lowest surface levels. The calcretes and sil-calcretes represent modifications of pre-existing detrital Kalahari Group sand and basal Kalahari pebbles which thinned over a Karoo bedrock high. Modification took place during wet periods when abundant Ca++-rich groundwater flowed along the structurally aligned valley system. With the onset of drier conditions, water table fluctuations led to the precipitation of nodular calcretes in the phreatic layer to a depth of about 20 m. A major geochemical change resulted in the preferential silicification of the nodular calcrete deposits. Conditions for silica mobilization may be related to drying-induced salinity and in situ geochemical differentiation brought about by pebble dissociation towards the top of the sediment pile. As calcretization and valley formation progressed to lower levels, silica release took place on a diminishing scale. Thermoluminescence dating infers a mid-Pleistocene age for sil-calcrete formation suggesting that valley evolution and original calcrete precipitation are much older. Late stage dissolution of CaCO3 from pre-existing surface calcretes or sil-calcretes led to the formation of pedogenic case-hardened deposits during a time of reduced flow through the Moshaweng system possibly during the upper or late Pleistocene. Copyright \u00a9 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.ViewShow abstractVariability of carbonate pedofeatures in a loess-paleosol sequence and their use for paleoreconstructionsArticleFull-text availableJun 2009J MT SCI-ENGL S. A. Sycheva Marina Pavlovna Lebedeva-Verba S. Inozemtzev Irina KovdaCarbonate pedofeatures were studied in details in a loess-paleosol pedocomplex near Kursk, in the central part of the European Plain. The soils studied included a modern Chernozem and five Pleistocene paleosols. Carbonate morphologies and distributions were described in the field. Various morphologies were sampled for further studies including micromorphology in thin sections and submicroscopic studies under a scanning electron microscope. The complex approach of investigation at macro-, micro-, and submicroscopic levels found that most of carbonate pedofeatures are secondary and multiphase. Many of them are related to cryogenic features. The general trend was of decreasing carbonate content in the older paleosols except for increased content in the 1st and 3rd paleosols. Most of carbonate morphologies are similar in the modern soil and paleosols, but pseudomycelium was found only in the modern Chernozem, while soft masses and impregnations are associated with the paleosols. Detailed study on carbonate attributes revealed their specific features in the modern soil and in paleosols. Veins have dissolution features under the modern environment and seem to reprecipitate in form of pseudomycelium. Coatings in paleosols at a depth of the 1st paleosol include specific fine tubes. Powdery soft masses and impregnations in the paleosols are strongly related to cryogenic fissures and paleopermafrost level. Under SEM they consist of tiny crystals, much smaller than in regular soft masses. Several types of hard concretions were identified: rounded, irregular and platy. Small concretions in the modern Chernozem have similar morphology and similar 14C-age as the rounded concretions of the upper paleosols. They are expected to represent the same generation of concretions. Platy concretions fill the bottom part of the large fissures. The 14C-age of hard concretions varies from 3310\u00b180 yrs. B.P in the 1st paleosol up to 20 400 yrs. B.P. in the 3rd. As a result we found the reflection of several wet-dry and cold-warm stages in carbonate morphologies and distributions. High variability of carbonates at macro-, micro- and submicroscopic levels indicates several generations and multiphase formation of carbonate pedofeatures in the loess-paleosol pedocomplex. Carbonate pedofeatures in the examined pedocomplex are more informative for the study of late Pleistocene and Holocene climatic cycles rather than characterization of a single paleosol.ViewShow abstractDuricrustsChapterJan 2009 John C. Dixon Sue McLarenWarm desert environments are characterized by the occurrence of a variety of surface and near-surface, chemically precipitated crusts, including calcrete, silcrete, and gypcrete, and their intergrades (Dixon 1994). Collectively, these are referred to as duricrusts (Woolnough 1930). This chapter focuses on the morphology, chemistry, mineralogy, and origin of the major types of crusts found in dryland environments. Particular attention is given to recent research from Australia, the United States, the Middle East and Africa.ViewShow abstractCalcareous Epigenetic Replacement (\u00abEpig\u00e9nie\u00bb) in Soils and Calcrete FormationChapterJan 1997 Alain Ruellan H. PaquetThis contribution is a review offering a new interpretation for the genesis of calcretes as defined by Goudie (1973). Calcretes are calcareous crusts which develop within weathering or soil profiles formed under warm climates with a marked dry season, excluding travertine or spring-, river- and water table cementations of various origins.ViewShow abstractIonic gold in calcrete revealed by LA-ICP-MS, SXRF and XANESArticleApr 2009GEOCHIM COSMOCHIM AC Melvyn Lintern Michael Verrall Robert Michael Hough Chris RyanHighly anomalous Au concentrations in calcrete were discovered in 1987 at the Bounty Gold Deposit, Western Australia. A strong correlation was noted between the Ca, Mg, Sr and Au in soil profiles which have not only attracted the interest of mineral explorers but also chemists, soil scientists, metallurgists and climatologists. Gold has been considered an inert element and so its strong association with the alkaline earth group of relatively mobile elements is both remarkable and intriguing. Despite widespread interest, there have been few published papers on the Au\u2013calcrete phenomenon. Here, we present work conducted on calcareous soil samples from above the Bounty mineralisation in Western Australia, prior to mining.ViewShow abstractLate Quaternary loess-like paleosols and pedocomplexes, geochemistry, provenance and source area weathering, Manasbal, Kashmir Valley, IndiaArticleFull-text availableJan 2017GEOMORPHOLOGY Babeesh Chalumbattil Aasif Mohmad Lone Manoj K. Jaiswal Hema AchyuthanThe late Quaternary loess and loess-like deposits in Kashmir Valley are natural archives that have preserved paleoclimate and paleoenvironmental records of the region. We present a loess-like paleosol located along the margin of the Manasbal Lake, Ganderbal, which was studied in detail for understanding the pedological processes and reconstructing the late Quaternary soil formation. In this paper we present loess-like paleosol formation of a nearly 10.6 m thick sequence exposed along the margin of Manasbal Lake, Ganderbal District, Srinagar, Kashmir. Geochemical and textural data of this loess-like sedimentary sequence fluctuate reflecting the varied depositional processes operating in the valley, differential intensity of weathering, and processes of pedogenesis. Weathering indices such as chemical index of alteration, chemical index of weathering, and plagioclase index of alteration reveal weak to moderate weathering of the parent material. Provenance discrimination diagrams of the present study disclose that the Manasbal loess-like paleosol sediments are derived from the mixed source rocks suggesting a variety of provenance with variable geological settings, which apparently have undergone weak to moderate recycling processes. The Manasbal paleosol horizons have been dated by the optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) method to the marine isotope stages mid-MIS-3 (41.7 \u00b1 8.0 ka) and late-MIS-2 (14.6 \u00b1 3.8 ka). During the MIS-3 period, the climate was wetter, forming a strong AhBtk paleosol as inferred from the geochemical data. A steady increase in the CaCO3 content and C/N ratio in the paleosols from 6.50 m (MIS-3) indicates arid and drier climatic conditions. The area around Manasbal Lake incised because of climate change and neotectonic activity since post-14 kaViewShow abstractTectonic and climatic controls on continental depositional facies in the Karoo Basin of northern Natal, South AfricaArticleFeb 1986SEDIMENT GEOL BRIAN R. TURNERThe eastern Karoo Basin, South Africa, contains a thick sequence of terrigenous clastic sediments comprising a meanderbelt facies, braided channel facies divided into coarse and fine subfacies, fluviolacustrine facies and aeolian facies. Depositional trends and changes in fluvial style reflect a progressive increase in aridity of the climate under stable tectonic conditions, interrupted by two phases of source area tectonism and the development of fine and coarse clastic wedges of the braided channel subfacies; the latter signifying a short interlude of cool, wet conditions. The fine braided channel subfacies occurs in the upper part of the meanderbelt facies, which was deposited by ephemeral, meandering mixed-load streams of variable discharge and sinuosity, under dry, semi-arid climatic conditions. These deposited complex, internally discordant channel sands and well-developed levee deposits. Following deposition of the coarse braided channel subfacies semi-arid conditions returned and fluvial deposition was dominated by ephemeral, straight to slightly sinuous mixed load streams characterised by simple channel sand bodies. As the aridity of the climate increased, the streams became more localised and carried an increasing proportion of fines. Interbedded with and overlying the fluvial deposits is a mudstone-dominated lacustrine sequence grading up into aeolian sands suggesting a playa lake-type situation. The general absence of evaporites from these sediments is attributed to the fresh nature of the lake waters, as evidenced by the freshwater aquatic organisms and clay-mineral suite, the lack of adequate inflow for solute accumulation and the removal of dust impregnated by salts from the surface of the dry lake bed during the dry season by superheated, upward-spiralling columns of air.ViewShow abstractBrief Communication: Beyond the South African cave paradigm- Australopithecus africanus from Plio-Pleistocene paleosol deposits at TaungArticleFull-text availableJun 2013Am J Phys Anthropol Stephanie Edwards Baker Colin G Menter Andy I R Herries Philip J. HopleyFollowing the discovery of the \"Taung Child\" (Australopithecus africanus) in 1924 in the Buxton-Norlim Limeworks near Taung, the fossil-bearing deposits associated with the Dart and Hrdli\u010dka pinnacles have been interpreted as the mined remnants of cave sediments that formed within the Plio-Pleistocene Thabaseek Tufa: either as a younger cave-fill or as contemporaneous carapace caves. When combined with the Plio-Pleistocene dolomitic cave deposits from the \"Cradle of Humankind,\" a rather restricted view emerges that South African early hominins derived from cave deposits, whereas those of east and central Africa are derived from fluvio-lacustrine and paleosol deposits. We undertook a sedimentological and paleomagnetic analysis of the pink-colored deposit (PCS) from which the \"Taung Child\" is purported to have derived and demonstrate that it is a calcrete, a carbonate-rich pedogenic sediment, which formed on the paleo-land surface. The deposit extends 100 s of meters laterally beyond the Dart and Hrdli\u010dka Pinnacles where it is interbedded with the Thabaseek Tufa, indicating multiple episodes of calcrete development and tufa growth. The presence of in situ rhizoconcretions and insect trace fossils (Celliforma sp. and Coprinisphaera sp.) and the distinctive carbonate microfabric confirm that the pink deposit is a pedogenic calcrete, not a calcified cave sediment. Paleomagnetic and stratigraphic evidence indicates that a second, reversed polarity, fossil-bearing deposit (YRSS) is a younger fissure-fill formed within a solutional cavity of the normal polarity tufa and pink calcrete (PCS). These observations have implications for the dating, environment, and taphonomy of the site, and increase the likelihood of future fossil discoveries within the Buxton-Norlim Limeworks. Am J Phys Anthropol, 2013. \u00a9 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.ViewShow abstractPost-Gondwanan continental sedimentation, Limpopo region, southeastern AfricaArticleFull-text availableAug 1996J AFR EARTH SCI MichielC.J. de Wit Gregory A. BothaThe post-Karoo age sedimentary succession known formerly as the Malvernia Formation, is currently termed the Malonga Formation, \u2018Forma\u00e7ao de Sena\u2019, \u2018Forma\u00e7ao de Singu\u00e9deze/Elefantes\u2019 and Gona-re-Zhou Plateau Beds in the Limpopo Basin region where South Africa, Mozambique and Zimbabwe have common borders. These rocks represent continental, taphrogenic sedimentation on the eastern margin of the emergent African continent after the breakup of Gondwana. The wide occurrence of this system along the northern Lebombo mountains and within the tectonically active Limpopo and Zambezi valleys, suggests the existence of a peidmont landsurface comprising coalesced alluvial fans and major fluvial channel/floodplain systems close to the continental margin during the Late Mesozoic to Early Cainozoic era.ViewShow abstractThe association of gold with calcreteArticleNov 2014ORE GEOL REV Melvyn LinternThe discovery that Au accumulates in calcrete (pedogenic carbonate or caliche) was made in 1987 by CSIRO. Calcrete is a general term describing accumulation of alkaline earth metals in soils of arid and semi-arid terrains around the world. The principal constituent of calcrete is calcite while Au is a noble metal. Calcrete has been a significant tool in a number of Au deposit discoveries, so understanding the mechanisms by which these diametrically different components come together is valuable for enhancing future discovery. Numerous laboratory experiments, case histories and exploration models have been published (most from Australia) yet we do not fully understand the mechanisms involved. It is timely, therefore, twenty-five years on since the first publication of this phenomenon, to review this highly unusual but economically important association.Critical to any review on Au in calcrete is to first consider calcretes themselves. The nature of a particular calcrete, where it has formed and mode of formation is relevant to how, where and why Au accumulates within it. This review commences with a background, nomenclature, history, classification and some examples of calcrete types found near Au deposits. How calcretes form, their origins and the role of biota is considered. Their locations in the regolith and landscape, as well as exploration models for Au in calcrete are discussed. A section on the chemistry of Au in calcretes details what we know about possible mechanisms of formation and considers what laboratory experiments on microorganisms and abiotic experiments tell us. Following on is a summary of practical aspects of identifying, collecting and analysing samples for exploration purposes. Selected mineral exploration case histories are described and how they fit into models of exploration and different regolith settings. Concluding sections include a summary and implications of this accumulated knowledge to discovering Au deposits.ViewShow abstractExperimental studies on the gold-in-calcrete anomaly at Edoldeh Tank Gold Prospect, Gawler Craton, South AustraliaArticleJan 2012Fuel Energ Abstr Robert Michael Hough Melvyn Lintern Chris RyanCalcrete sampling is the near-surface exploration method of choice for Au in many drier parts of the world, particularly southern Australia. Edoldeh Tank is a weakly mineralised Au prospect in calcrete terrain that lies at the eastern edge of the Great Victoria Desert dunefield (South Australia). At Edoldeh Tank a variety of calcretes occur but the dominant form is a laminated calcrete horizon (LCH). The mineralogy of the near-surface soil is relatively simple and consists of calcite, dolomite, quartz, kaolinite and minor smectite; quartz dominates the unconsolidated overlying sandy soil, and carbonate minerals dominate the LCH. We determine the distribution and nature of the Au at a small scale using a variety of techniques, including SEM, LA-ICP-MS and SXRF and dated sediments to understand calcrete genesis. In a series of thirty excavated soil pits, Ca and Au concentrations increased with depth, markedly so at the LCH. We provide multiple lines of evidence to show there is a general association of Au with calcrete but not a strong correlation as seen with soil profiles elsewhere that have younger, recently formed powdery calcrete. Experiments suggest Au and Ag are currently mobile in this environment despite the low rainfall and that Au occurs in two forms: Au (possibly ionic) occurs throughout the sample with some regions having higher concentrations than others; particulate Au occurs randomly but is more common where the general level of Au is higher. The laminated nature of the calcrete suggests it has formed episodically. An association of Ag with Au in calcrete suggests a means to distinguish anomalies that have developed in residual regolith from those that have dispersed into adjacent sediments. Laminated calcrete is just as effective an exploration sample medium as powdery calcrete. Mobilised Ca, Au and Ag in calcrete can extend the lateral extent and distance from the source of the geochemical anomaly thus providing an effective vector to target for sampling. A landscape dispersion model of Au in calcrete is presented, which requires further testing, to assist the mineral explorer in covered terrains.ViewShow abstractOrigin of calcrete and dolocrete in the carbonate mantle of St Vincent basin, southern South AustraliaArticleFull-text availableJan 2010 John C. DixonCalcrete profiles developed in a toposequence in the carbonate mantle covering the landscape in the St Vincent Basin South Australia are examined. Strong trends in morphology, chemistry and mineralogy are observed from higher to lower profile and topographic locations. Carbonate profiles are dominated by calcrete in both higher profile and toposequence locations while dolocrete dominates in lower profile and toposequence locations. These changes are accompanied by progressive increases in dolomite abundance and decreasing calcite abundance and reflected in decreasing Ca/Mg ratios with depth and decreasing toposequence elevation. Observed trends are explained in terms of profile leaching and groundwater drainage.ViewShow abstractEVOLUCION Y GENESIS DE CALCRETAS PEDOGENICAS EN LA PALEOBAHIA DE TONGOYThesisFull-text availableJun 2011 Marco PfeifferEn la paleobah\u00eda de Tongoy (30\u00b0S), ubicada en Chile centro-norte, se encuentran cuatro terrazas de abrasi\u00f3n marina, denominadas TV, TIV, TIII y TII, las cuales se asocian a los estadios isot\u00f3picos marinos (MIS, por sus siglas en ingl\u00e9s) MIS 1, MIS 5e, MIS 7 y MIS 11. Sobre las tres terrazas m\u00e1s antiguas, se desarrollan suelos carbon\u00e1ticos cementados, que se conocen en la literatura como calcretas. Las calcretas de Tongoy alcanzan un estado de desarrollo maduro en las tres terrazas donde se presentan, llegando en la terraza TII al estado VI en la secuencia de desarrollo de Machete (1985), el cual corresponde al m\u00e1s avanzado. La formaci\u00f3n de estas calcretas responde a una serie de procesos pedog\u00e9nicos, los cuales dan cuenta de una ciclicidad en el paleoclima de la zona. Las calcretas estudiadas, se subdividen en calcreta masiva, calcreta laminar y calcreta brechosa, esta \u00faltima presente solo en la terraza TII que corresponde a la m\u00e1s antigua. La calcreta masiva posee una serie de rasgos que muestran la participaci\u00f3n de organismos en la precipitaci\u00f3n del carbonato, presentando una f\u00e1brica de tipo \u201cbeta\u201d. La calcreta laminar presenta una f\u00e1brica de tipo \u201calfa\u201d, que corresponde a la precipitaci\u00f3n de calcita por procesos f\u00edsico-qu\u00edmicos. La calcreta brechosa, corresponde al fracturamiento de la calcreta laminar, y se da en estados avanzados de desarrollo de este tipo de suelos. El desarrollo de calcretas se da en determinados climas, por lo que su presencia en las terrazas TII, TIII y TIV sugieren condiciones clim\u00e1ticas similares entre el MIS 11 (412 ka) y posterior al MIS 5e (125 ka). Sin embargo, existen rasgos y procesos que sugieren la existencia de fluctuaciones entre climas m\u00e1s \u00e1ridos y m\u00e1s h\u00famedos que el \u00f3ptimo para la formaci\u00f3n de calcretas. A modo de ejemplo se pueden citar la presencia de cristales de yeso y halita en las partes bajas de la calcreta masiva de los perfiles de la terraza TII, los cuales indican la presencia de climas \u00e1ridos previo a la formaci\u00f3n de la calcreta masiva; mientras que la presencia de arcillas iluviadas en el l\u00edmite entre la calcreta masiva y laminar, sugiere la ocurrencia de per\u00edodos con mayor cantidad de precipitaciones, las que habr\u00edan disminuido posteriormente para generar la calcreta laminar. La ocurrencia de paleocanales en los niveles TIV y TII que erosionan la calcreta, indican per\u00edodos con presencia de precipitaciones torrenciales, posterior a los cuales no se form\u00f3 calcreta de ning\u00fan tipo, ya sea por no existir las condiciones clim\u00e1ticas necesarias, o bien por ser fen\u00f3menos de data reciente. Esta ciclicidad clim\u00e1tica reflejada en los procesos geomorfol\u00f3gicos y pedog\u00e9nicos, mediante la aplicaci\u00f3n de m\u00e9todos de dataci\u00f3n absoluta, permitir\u00e1n realizar estudios de paleoambiente en la zona, aportando con datos paleoclim\u00e1ticos hasta el MIS 11, para una zona que carece de informaci\u00f3n de largo plazo. En este sentido, este estudio constituye una base en la cual se explican los procesos pedog\u00e9nicos asociados a una cronosecuencia de suelos desarrollados sobre terrazas de abrasi\u00f3n marina, los cuales pueden ser utilizados a futuro para la reconstrucci\u00f3n paleoclim\u00e1tica del Norte Chico.ViewShow abstractIdentification of sources and infiltration regimes of nitrate in the semi-arid Kalahari: Regional differences and implications for groundwater managementArticleFull-text availableDec 2011 J Wrabel Susanne Stadler Siep Talma Gideon TredouxThe Kalahari region of southern Africa offers much potential for nitrogen input into its groundwater. High nitrate concentrations in Kalahari groundwater are therefore quite common and are caused by both anthropogenic and natural sources. Forecasting groundwater nitrate concentrations remains challenging. Source identification of nitrate contamination in groundwater is an important first step for groundwater management and quality prediction, and is aided by isotope analysis of nitrate in the water. Comparative data from 3 groundwater study sites in the Kalahari of Botswana and Namibia with widely different characteristics are presented. Two of the sites (Ghanzi and Gobabis) have shallow water tables in fractured quartzite. These aquifers were affected by pollution from cattle wastes (manure) and septic tank outflows resulting in groundwater nitrate levels exceeding 1 000 mg NO3/\u2113 and in \u03b415N values of between +7 and +20 %o AIR. Short-term increases of groundwater nitrate concentrations were triggered by exceptional rainfall events occurring every 10-20 years. At the third site (Serowe in Botswana) there is similar land use and land cover, yet the aquifers are deeper, groundwater dates to Late-Pleistocene age and borehole levels do not show a response to present-day high-rainfall episodes. Nitrate levels up to 219 mg/\u2113 are found, but lower 15N content (\u03b415N of +3 to +8 0/00) indicates a natural origin of the nitrate. In this area pollution nitrate is sufficiently delayed in the vadose zone, reaching the saturated zone much later. The data from all 3 sites suggest that nitrogen management options can only be evaluated once an understanding of sources, processes and flow patterns has been established.ViewShow abstractCalcium Carbonate FeaturesChapterDec 2010 Matthew Canti Curtis Monger Nicolas DurandThe precipitation of calcium carbonate is common in soils and regoliths, especially in soils of arid environments. The precipitation and the accumulation of calcium carbonate in soils and regoliths are very complex phenomena. As they are linked to the interaction between the lithosphere, the biosphere, and the atmosphere, pedogenic carbonates may be important proxies of paleoenvironmental changes. The study of the morphological expression and hierarchical organisation of calcitic pedofeatures in thin sections allows us to partially decipher the climatic, geochemical, and biological influences on the precipitation of carbonates in soils. With the contribution of submicroscopic techniques (e.g., SEM), progress has been made in the understanding of the relation between the biological activity and the precipitation of carbonate, and many calcitic features seem to be linked to biological processes, in a direct or indirect manner. The carbonates may represent a highly active phase, undergoing intense transformation such as recrystallisation, dissolution, and secondary carbonate precipitation.ViewShow abstractCalcareous crusts on exposed Pleistocene limestones: A case study from Grand Cayman, British West IndiesArticleJan 2013SEDIMENT GEOL Rong Li Brian JonesCalcareous crusts, which include laminar (up to 6 cm thick) and non-laminar calcretes, have developed on ooid grainstones and skeletal wacke/pack/grain/floatstone in the Pleistocene Ironshore Formation exposed at Morgan\u2019s Harbour, Tarpon Springs, and Rogers Wreck Point on Grand Cayman, British West Indies. Non-laminar calcretes, which consist largely of micrite with variably altered skeletal fragments and lithoclasts derived from the host limestone, contain peloids in their basal parts. In contrast, the laminar calcretes are formed of porous laminae and low-porosity laminae. Calcified roots are common in the porous laminae but rare in the low-porosity laminae. The \u03b418O values of calcretes, from \u20135.22\u2030 to + 0.16\u2030, have a positive correlation with the \u03b413C values that vary from -10.03\u2030 to -6.41\u2030 at Tarpon Springs, from -11.57\u2030 to -5.43\u2030 at Morgan\u2019s Harbour, and from -9.89\u2030 to -8.68\u2030 at Rogers Wreck Point. The non-laminar calcretes reflect progressive micritization of the bedrock with a basal peloidal zone that passes upward into the micrite zone. In contrast, laminar calcretes are attributed to accretionary build-up dictated by microscale processes that were controlled largely by the interplay of plant roots and their associated microorganisms. The positive correlation between the \u03b418O and \u03b413C values from the calcareous crusts indicates that evaporation influenced calcite precipitation. The \u03b413C values of the laminar calcretes record a change from vegetation dominated by C3 plants that grew in a cool, wet climate, to a C3/C4 vegetation that grew in a hotter, drier climate. The Cayman calcretes resemble those found on the Pleistocene Miami Limestone in Florida, and highlight the possibility that these calcareous crusts may reflect regional climates and may therefore enable regional stratigraphic correlation.ViewShow abstractSoft-sediment deformation structures in Late Miocene\u2013Pleistocene sediments on the pediment of the M\u00e1tra Hills (Visonta, Atk\u00e1r, Verseg): Cryoturbation, load structures or seismites?ArticleDec 2005TECTONOPHYSICS Zolt\u00e1n Horv\u00e1th Judit Ber\u00e9nyi-\u00dcveges Erika Micheli A. MindszentyThe studied area, built up by silty clayey and partly sandy sediments and paleosols, lies on the tectonically active Northern margins of the Pannonian Basin. Wavy, sagging load casts can be observed in the upper part of the Late Miocene alluvial complex and larger scale sagging load casts, flame structures, drops and pillows detected in its Quaternary cover were studied in detail, in order to understand the origins of soft sediment deformation which characterized this young sedimentary suite. Sedimentological, paleopedological and mineralogical observations suggest that:ViewShow abstractThe contributions of geometallurgy to the recovery of lithified heavy mineral resources at the Namakwa Sands mine, West Coast of South AfricaArticleOct 2011MINER ENG A. Rozendaal Carlo PhilanderThe Namakwa Sands heavy mineral deposit is located at Brand-se-Baai along the West Coast of South Africa and is a world class producer of premium quality zircon (ZrSiO4), ilmenite (FeTiO3) and rutile (TiO2) concentrates from mainly aeolian sands. Superimposed on the coastal clastic Cainozoic ore-bearing sequence is a calcium\u2013magnesium-rich pseudo-stratigraphy locally referred to as cemented hard layers that effectively lithify the mineralised sands to various degrees of hardness, rendering it unsuitable for routine treatment by wet spirals. Namakwa Sands has recently completed an expansion programme, inclusive of a SAG mill and screen installation, which allows the processing of the cemented hard layers, the first ever in the mineral sands industry. Operationally, the SAG mill and screen are performing well in tandem and are helping to improve mineral resource utilisation to levels not previously possible. Contained zircon output has increased, but at the cost of marginally lower recoveries as predicted from pilot studies. This paper reports on the systematic geometallurgical approach to improve mineral resource utilisation by successfully processing lithified ore.ViewShow abstractDesert Crusts and Rock CoatingsChapterMar 2011 David J NashIntroductionSodium nitrate depositsHalite crustsGypsum crustsCalcreteSilcreteDesert rock coatingsPalaeoenvironmental significance of crustsReferencesViewShow abstractSoils of South AfricaArticleJan 2010 J. Lambrechts M. Fey J. Hughes Anthony Jan MillsSoils of South Africa is the first book in seventy years that provides a comprehensive account of South African soils. The book arranges more than seventy soil forms into fourteen groups and then provides, for each group: \u2022 maps showing their distribution and abundance throughout South Africa \u2022 descriptions of morphological, chemical and physical properties \u2022 a detailed account of classification and its correlation with international systems \u2022 a discussion of soil genesis which includes a review of relevant research papers \u2022 appraisal of soil quality from a land use perspective as well as for its ecological significance \u2022 illustrative examples of soil profiles with analytical data and accompanying interpretations. There is also a fascinating account of the special relationship that exists between South African animals and soil environments. Soils of South Africa should interest students and researchers in the earth, environmental and biological sciences, as well as environmental practitioners, farmers, foresters and civil engineers.ViewShow abstractFluvial facies patterns and chemical sediments. Their control on U, Ba, and base metal concentration in the \u00bbBurgsandstein\u00ab (Upper Triassic Keuper, SE Germany)ArticleFull-text availableJun 1988Geol Rundsch Z Allg Geol Harald G. DillThe Upper Triassic clastic \u00bbKeuper\u00ab beds in southern Germany have attracted much attention during the last decades for their sandstone-hosted U deposits in the \u00bbBurgsandstein\u00ab, in particular. Paleogeographically this arenaceous-argillaceous sequence is compared with a fanplaya environment, showing a great variety of fluvial drainage patterns (distal braided stream, meandering streams displaying different degrees of sinuosity). Aside from this, duricrusts (dolcretes/calcretes, petrified wood/\u00bbsilcretes\u00ab, phosphatized arkoses/phoscretes) are widespread in these arenaceous beds. Both, clastic and chemical sediments, play a significant part for metal concentration. Ore enrichment is of two principal types, early and late diagenetic. They were deeply influenced by the basin subsidence. Phosphatization concomitant with U precipitation took place near the fan head, whereas silicified wood and calcretes are more common within a transition from the fan towards the playa, where meandering rivers predominate. Uraniferous calcretes partly originated from paleosols, partly from ground water percolation. At a subsequent stage, these carbonate encrustations locally got reworked. U black ores containing Cu, Pb, Fe, Zn, and Co-sulfides were precipitated from ground waters when entering less permeable lithologies. Ground water stagnated at the playafan boundary or, on a more local scale, between fluvial channels and overbank or crevasse splay depositions. Eh and pH changes are suggested to have been controlling the U and sulfide concentration.ViewShow abstractChapter 12 Paleosol Recognition: a Guide to Early Diagenesis in Terrestrial SettingsChapterDec 1992 V.P. WrightPaleosols\u2014 that is, soils formed on a landscape of the past are now being widely recognized in the geological record, and are potentially very powerful tools for a variety of paleoenvironmental purposes. They have also been used as indicators of porosity evolution in ancient limestones. A variety of criteria is used for recognizing paleosols. Some are not replicated by sedimentological or other diagenetic processes and so provide unique and diagnostic evidence. Paleosols can be recognized based on their biological features, color, destratification, horizonation and boundaries, granulometrics, mineral assemblages, macrostructures, and micromorphology. Many of the features used to recognize paleosols are subtle and prone to alteration during diagenesis, but surprisingly little work has been carried out on these problems. The physical effects of burial diagenesis, such as compaction and pressure solution, are relatively easily recognized as overprints. Many major changes can occur very early in the burial history of the paleosol, and two common situations require consideration. The first is that of an aggrading floodplain, and second, a paralic setting during a transgression.ViewShow abstractGroundwater dolocretes from the Upper Triassic of the Paris Basin, France: A case study of an arid, continental diagenetic faciesArticleDec 1992Sedimentology Christoph Spotl V. P. WrightThick dolomite-cemented horizons (dolocretes) occur within a fluvial sandstone-mudstone sequence of Late Triassic age in the western part of the Paris Basin, France. Two types of dolomites can be distinguished: (a) nodular dolomitic beds less than a few metres thick, which formed within mottled overbank siltstones and mudstones; and (b) massive dolomite up to 16 m thick, which occurs in coarse grained channel sandstones and conglomerates. The majority of the dolomite consists of a finely crystalline groundmass of dolomicrospar and, less commonly, dolomicrite. Glaebules, irregular spar-filled cracks, spheroidal dolomite, silicification and vuggy porosity are locally abundant in the massive dolomite. In contrast, biologically induced micromorphological features such as rhizocretions and alveolar-septal fabrics were observed in the thin, nodular dolomite beds. The dolomite is near stoichiometric, well ordered and non-ferroan. 18O values range from \u22127\u00b77 to \u22120\u00b74%o PDB and 18O values range from \u22125\u00b71 to + 1\u00b78%0 PDB and no obvious difference in the stable isotopic composition between both types of dolomites was observed. Sr isotope ratios range from 0\u00b77101 to 0\u00b77126 and are invariably higher than the contemporary Triassic sea water. A vadose\u2014pedogenic origin for the thin dolocrete layers is indicated by the occurrence of rhizocretions and other biological structures. Several features, however, argue against a pedogenic origin for the massive carbonates, most notably the absence of biologically induced structures, the occurrence in coarse grained channel (and not overbank) deposits, and the great thickness. These units are thus interpreted as groundwater in origin. Phreatic calcretes of Quaternary age, widespread in inland Australia, are regarded as a modern analogue for the Triassic Paris Basin dolocretes. Petrographic observations argue in favour of primary (proto)dolomite precipitation, although early diagenetic replacement of calcite by (proto)dolomite cannot be ruled out. Strontium and carbon isotope data of early diagenetic dolocrete cements and oxygen isotope data of early diagenetic silica indicate an entirely non-marine, continental origin for the groundwaters. The poorly ordered and non-stoichiometric protodolomite probably underwent stabilization upon further burial resulting in a near-stoichiometric, well ordered dolomite that clearly lacks evidence for pervasive recrystallization.ViewShow abstractMicromorphology, submicroscopy and microprobe study of carbonate pedofeatures in a Vertisol gilgai soil complex, South RussiaArticleDec 2003CATENA Irina Kovda L.R. Drees L. P. WildingCarbonate nodules and soft masses were studied in a gilgai soil complex in the North Caucasus, South Russia. Microrelief with an amplitude about 30 cm resulted in a wetter environment with stronger leaching in the microlow and a drier pedoenvironment with carbonate accumulation in the microhigh. Various macroforms of carbonate nodules and soft masses were identified in soil pits and sampled for micromorphology, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and microprobe analyses to better characterize them and elucidate their pedogenesis. Common and unique attributes were described for carbonate pedofeatures depending on loci in gilgai soil complex. The most probable hypothesis for their formation is as follows. Nodules represent early pedogenic products that were initiated before gilgai formation. Modern hydrology resulted in variability of dissolution/recrystallization of the nodules along the gilgai microtopography. The variability in degree of impregnation, aggregation into pellets, and presence of hard nodular cores reflects several generations of soft masses.ViewShow abstractSedimentolog\u00eda y estratigraf\u00eda de dep\u00f3sitos del Mioceno tard\u00edo de los valles transversales de la provincia de La Pampa, ArgentinaArticleDec 2013 Florencia R Lorenzo A.E. Mehl Marcelo Z\u00e1rateViewBreccias and ores. Part 1: History, organization and petrography of brecciasArticleAug 1989ORE GEOL REV Peter LaznickaAlthough the term breccia is one of the oldest rock names still in use and proliferating in its application, a satisfactory definition remains problematic and an overall classification of breccias is non-existent. The names of breccia varieties (several hundred) please the heart rather than the computer, and there is little interdisciplinary correlation among the more than fifty specialized schools of breccia study.This contribution reviews briefly the history of breccia research and provides a list of the present study trends, complete with references, with emphasis on ore-associated breccias wherever possible. Conventional breccia definitions and their shortcomings are discussed and a case is made for the introduction of the petrographic category of \u201ccoarse fragmentites\u201d of which the \u201ctypical\u201d sedimentary breccias and conglomerates as well as volcanic, tectonic, hydrothermal, impact and other fragmental materials are members, whether designated or not as \u201cbreccia\u201d in the conventional literature.This is followed by a proposed rational organization (classification) of coarse fragmentites and breccias based on the regime of formation and architecture (fabric, \u201cGef\u00fcge\u201d). Two fundamental end-member sequences (a,b) and a transitional suite (c) can be recognized: (a) Disaggregation fragmentites (D-breccias), produced from a solid progenitor by increasing rate of fracturing, expansion, rotation, mixing and attrition. The transitional sequence is crackle\u2192mosaic\u2192rubble\u2192m\u00e9lange\u2192milled breccia. (b) Aggregation fragmentites (A-breccias), generated by gathering, aggregation and accumulation of originally dispersed fragments at the site of deposition. These materials form a sequence ranging from tightly packed, fragment-supported matrix-free fragmentites through matrix-infilled, matrix-supported fragmentites to lonestone rocks. (c) In-transport fragmentites (T-breccias) formed by redeposition of an aggregate gathered in an earlier phase of development as an A-fragmentite, or by transportation and redeposition of an advanced member (i.e. rubble, m\u00e9lange or milled fragmental aggregate) of a D-fragmentite. Examples of metallic mineralizations coeval with, or superimposed on the fragmentite sequences are reviewed.ViewShow abstractWoody vegetation-environment relations in a semi-arid savanna in the northern TransvaalArticleAug 1992S AFR J BOT Timothy Gordon O'ConnorThe relations between gradients in the composition and structure of the woody vegetation and environmental factors, principally substrate type, were investigated with correspondence analysis for an area of 8700ha of mopane veld in the northern Transvaal. Colophospermum mopane was present in all 269 stands sampled, and 46 woody species occurred frequently enough to be included in the analysis. The first ordination axis described a gradient from shrub woodlands with a high abundance of C. mopane on colluvial or alluvial soils or exposed calcrete, through to taller woodlands with a lower abundance of C. mopane and a greater equitability of other species, occurring on either shallow non-calcareous soils overlying gneisses or schists or on rugged terrain of diabase or marble geology. The second axis separated the different shrub C. mopane woodlands on calcrete from those on colluvial or alluvial soils. There were significant differences between substrate types in the abundance of twelve species of the twenty most common species tested.ViewShow abstractCalcrete and near-surface geology of Kuwait City and suburbs, Kuwait, Arabian GulfArticleJan 1988SEDIMENT GEOL Jawad S. Al-SulaimiNear-surface accumulation of pedogenic carbonate (calcrete) is a common and characteristic feature of the landscape of Kuwait City and its suburbs. The principal host material for these calcretes is a thick sequence of unconsolidated quartzose sand. A typical fully developed soil profile can be divided into five zones: in descending order these are (1) a top calcareous aeolian soil; (2) a zone of friable sand with powdery or tightly cemented calcrete lumps (nodules); (3) a massive calcrete zone; (4) a mottled calcrete zone; and (5) unaltered parent material. Episodic formation of calcrete is indicated by the occurrence of multiple profiles in which zones are repeated.Calcrete ooids and pseudo-ooids of accretionary origin are characteristic of the upper calcrete zone. The carbonate fraction in the upper calcrete zone consists dominantly of low-Mg calcite with minor amounts of dolomite. Replacement was a major process in formation of the massive calcrete and the dominant cementing material is largely low-Mg calcite and/or microcrystalline dolomite.Aeolian dust is considered to be the major source of ions for calcrete formation in Kuwait City and suburbs. An earlier-introduced model* is applied to explain the mechanisms of formation and precipitation of low-Mg calcite and dolomite.The calcrete thickness in the study area is explained by episodic deposition of fluviatile sand and calcrete formation during the Oligocene through Lower Miocene period.ViewShow abstractMarine and terrestrial sedimentation across the T\u2013J transition in the North German BasinArticleOct 2017PALAEOGEOGR PALAEOCL Matthias Franz Gregor Barth Carmen Heunisch Markus WolfgrammThe global Mesozoic sea-level rise contributed to the stepwise flooding of the Central European Basin (CEB) across the T-J transition and transformed the CEB from a late Triassic inland playa to an early Jurassic semi-enclosed inland sea. The calibration of sections from North Germany and Thuringia using high-resolution palynomorph and ammonite biostratigraphy contributes to the improved temporal and spatial resolution of this decisive period. The herein proposed Deltoidospora-Concavisporites (DC) Zone, placed between the Rhaetian Ricciisporites-Polypodiisporites (RP) Zone and the Hettangian Pinuspollenites-Trachysporites Zone, marks the transitional zone of overlapping Rhaetian and Hettangian palynomorphs in brackish-marine, brackish and terrestrial environments of the North German Basin (NGB). Thus, the DC Zone enables the identification of the T-J transition in the NGB. Following a short-term ingression in the late Norian Corollina-Porcellispora Subzone, the first Rhaetian transgression contributed to substantial marine-terrestrial facies shifts. The diachronous transgressive onlap of brackish-marine strata culminated in a first Rhaetian maximum flooding in the upper Corollina-Enzonalasporites Zone to lower Rhaetipollis-Limbosporites (RL) Zone. After a regressive maximum in the middle RL Zone, the next transgression culminated in a second Rhaetian maximum flooding in the upper RL Zone. Following the end-Triassic regression, herein assigned to the upper RP Zone, the diachronous transgressive onlap of marine shales marks the change to marine Jurassic environments. The herein proposed Deltoidospora-Concavisporites (DC) Zone, placed between the Rhaetian Ricciisporites-Polypodiisporites (RP) Zone and the Hettangian Pinuspollenites-Trachysporites Zone, marks the transitional zone of overlapping Rhaetian and Hettangian palynomorphs in brackish-marine, brackish and terrestrial environments of the North German Basin (NGB). Thus, the DC Zone enables the identification of the T-J transition in the NGB. At the western gate of the CEB, the onset of marine Hettangian strata with ammonites, dated as the P. erugatum Biohorizon at St. Audrie's Bay, postdates the base Hettangian GSSP by ~. 250. kyr. From there to Thuringia, the diachronous onlap of marine Hettangian strata with ammonites, herein dated as the P. plicatulum Biohorizon, took place over ~. 100. kyr. The first Jurassic maximum flooding is dated as the interval of the P. psilonotum to P. plicatulum Biohorizons (lower Planorbis Zone). Rhaetian-Hettangian 3rd-order sequences of the CEB correlate with contemporaneous sequences described from Tethyan and peri-Tethyan basins pointing to circum-Tethyan eustatic cycles. The 4th-order sequences are evident in the Rhaetian-Hettangian, but only a set of Rhaetian 4th-order sequences can be correlated in the NGB so far.ViewShow abstractShow moreThis research doesn't cite any other publications.AdJoin ResearchGate to find the people and research you need to help your work.15+ million members118+ million publications700k+ research projectsJoin for freeRecommended publicationsDiscover more publications, questions and projects in TerminologyArticleFull-text availableThe occurrence of vitrified dung from the Kamdeboo district, southern Karoo, and Den Staat, Limpopo...January 2003 \u00b7 South African Journal of ScienceJ.J.B. Dreyer Leon JacobsonJ.C. Loock[...]W.A. van der WesthuizenWE DEMONSTRATE THAT UNDER CERTAIN conditions vitrified dung as well as other biomass-derived aggregates can occur at archaeological sites throughout southern Africa. Recommendations are made about the terminology used to describe these aggregates. View full-textArticleFull-text availableInterpreting DPSH penetration values in sand soilsSeptember 2017 \u00b7 Journal of the South African Institution of Civil Engineers Charles MacRobertSite investigations to classify the underlying soil for geotechnical purposes often rely on in-situ penetrometer tests. Two common tests used in southern Africa are the Standard Penetration Test (SPT) and Dynamic Probe Super Heavy (DPSH) test. Although the specific work per blow is essentially the same in both tests, the resulting penetration values are not equivalent. The DPSH tends to be more ... [Show full abstract] variable than the SPT and has higher blow counts. A comparison of SPT and DPSH penetration values at a series of strata below sites has been undertaken. From this, new relative density descriptor boundaries, based on DPSH penetration values, are suggested for sand soils.View full-textArticleFull-text availableGeology and Mineral Ressources of the Central and Southern Africa Subcontinent, Epidodes 15 (3), 211...January 1992 \u00b7 Episodes R.T. F Lubala Mumba ChabuView full-textChapterThe Western Free State Panfield: A Landscape of Myriad Pans and LunettesMarch 2015 Peter J. HolmesThe descriptor Western Free State Panfield covers the greatest concentration of pans in southern Africa. Many Free State pans boast fringing lunette dunes on their southern and south-eastern margins. Lunettes derive their name from their sickle-moon shape, yet the environmental requirements which promote and sustain the formation of pan-lunette sequences are still not fully understood. In the ... [Show full abstract] western Free State, pans form almost exclusively on the shale substrate of the Ecca Group , suggesting a significant measure of geological control . An apparent pattern of pan orientation exists in agreement with palaeodrainage lines. This supports the notion of bedrock influence on drainage, with drainage in turn playing a direct role in pan formation . Lithological (rock type) control on the formation of pans in the western Free State is, clearly, important. This chapter describes the morphology of pans and lunettes (the two features should, arguably, not be separated) and reviews the origins of their formation. Finally, pans as a resource are examined, and their significance as a key element of the Free State landscape and a proxy for environmental change is assessed.Read moreDiscover moreDownload citationWhat type of file do you want? RIS BibTeX Plain TextWhat do you want to download? Citation only Citation and abstractDownloadLooking for the full-text?You can request the full-text of this article directly from the authors on ResearchGate.Request full-textAlready a member? Log inorDiscover by subject areaRecruit researchersJoin for freeLoginEmail Tip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inor log in withWelcome back! Please log in.Email \u00b7 HintTip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inor log in withNo account? Sign upAboutNewsCompanyCareersSupportHelp centerFAQBusiness solutionsRecruitingAdvertisingAd\u00a9 ResearchGate 2019. All rights reserved.ImprintTermsPrivacy", "Talik - Wikipedia Talik From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search For other uses, see Talik (disambiguation). A talik is a layer of year-round unfrozen ground that lies in permafrost areas. In regions of continuous permafrost, taliks often occur underneath shallow thermokarst lakes and rivers, where the deep water does not freeze in winter, and thus the soil underneath will not freeze either. Sometimes closed, open and through talik are distinguished. These terms refer to whether the talik is completely surrounded by permafrost, is open to the top (e.g. a thermokarst lake), or open to both top and unfrozen layers beneath the permafrost, respectively. Supra-permafrost taliks[edit] Due to climate fluctuation or change, some permafrost regions may develop an unfrozen layer between the seasonally thawing/freezing active layer and the permafrost. The layer is called supra-permafrost (above the permafrost) talik; it is different from traditional taliks, which are usually associated with water bodies, in that supra-permafrost talik occurs because the ground that thawed in the summer does not completely refreeze in the winter. Calculations show that climate warming would induce supra-permafrost taliks in intermediately cold regions (in very cold regions, warming simply induces a deeper summer thaw without forming the talik layer; while in warm, shallow permafrost regions, permafrost quickly disappears). This type of taliks has recently been observed in Russia. With time and continued increase in air temperature or snow depth, this talik layer will become thicker and thicker and the deep permafrost layer would eventually disappear. Findings from a scientific study suggest occurrence of open taliks within areas of fault zones and those influenced by large rivers.[1] See also[edit] Frost heaving Palsa Pingo References[edit] ^ D Nicolsky and N Shakhova (25 March 2010), Modeling sub-sea permafrost in the East Siberian Arctic Shelf: the Dmitry Laptev Strait, IOP Science vtePeriglacial environmentLandforms Blockfield Bratschen Cryoplanation terrace Glacial erratic Paha Palsa Periglacial lake Pingo Protalus rampart Rock glacier Strandflat Glaciokarst Thermokarst Patterned ground Frost boil Polygons Solifluction lobes and sheets Sorted stripe Stone ring Processes Cryoplanation Cryosuction Cryoturbation Fluvio-thermal erosion Frost heave Frost weathering Gelifluction Ice segregation Methane release Nivation Solifluction Syngenetic permafrost growth Zero-curtain effect Soils and deposits Active layer Gelisols Ice wedge Loess Peat Permafrost Stratified slope deposit Talik Yedoma Biomes and ecotones Arctic tundra Arctic tree line Antarctic oasis Antarctic tundra Montane grasslands and shrublands Alpine tundra Alpine tree line (Massenerhebung effect) Taiga (Drunken trees) Climate Alpine Polar Subpolar Category:Periglacial landforms Template:Glaciers Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Talik&oldid=677996874\" Categories: Physical geographyTypes of soilArctic geography terminologyPermafrost Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces ArticleTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version Languages \u0627\u0644\u0639\u0631\u0628\u064a\u0629DeutschFran\u00e7aisItalianoPolski\u0420\u0443\u0441\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439\u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0441\u044c\u043a\u0430 Edit links This page was last edited on 26 August 2015, at 20:23\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "EUCOP (Jun 2014), European Conference on Permafrost, \u00c9vora Portugal - Conference Trade Shows Conferences Top 100 Venues Login Add Event Promote Event Download App ConferenceEuropean Conference on Permafrost 18-21 Jun 2014 ( notify new dates ) Cathedral of \u00c9vora, \u00c9vora, Portugal Interested Request a Booth Share About Reviews The European Conference on Permafrost, organized by the Abreu will take place from 18th June to the 21st June 2014 in Aveiro, Portugal. The conference will cover areas like Challenges of permafrost predictive modeling under a changing climate, Recent advances on Antarctic Permafrost and Soils, New Developments on Permafrost Geophysics, History of Permafrost Research, Education and Outreach, Open session on Permafrost, Periglacial Geomorphology, Permafrost and mountain microbiology from .. continue reading microbial function, adaptation and activity to environmental impacts, Biogeochemistry of Permafrost in Transition, Topography and microclimate effects on permafrost and seasonally frozen ground, From kinematics to dynamics, geomorphic and physical controls of permafrost creep, Limnological processes in permafrost environments, Dynamics of ice wedge polygons and thermokarst in tundra landscapes inventory, functioning and development, Planetary permafrost, geomorphology and Earth analogues, From Coastal to Subsea Permafrost, Techniques of paleo environmental reconstruction from periglacial deposits, Reconstruction and Modelling of paleo permafrost, The role of geophysics in permafrost studies, Remote Sensing, DEMs and GIS applications in periglacial research, Permafrost and frozen ground engineering, Bridging the gap between models and observations in permafrost landscapes, Multi Decadal Perspectives on an International Permafrost Monitoring Program, Permafrost modeling across different scales Permafrost International Monitoring and Observing and Coordinating Activities. Some prominent speakers include Oleg Anisimov, James Bockheim, Christian Hauck.Timings 09:00 AM-06:00 PM (expected) * not verifiedEntry Fees Not available* * Check Official WebsiteParticipantsupto 100 DelegatesEstimated CountCategory & Type Conference MiscellaneousEditions 18-21 Jun 2014 Frequency Not Available Official Links Website Contacts Report Error Claim this event Event Reputation Organizer Reputation Based on ratings Venue Reputation Rating not availableOrganizer Send Stall Book RequestAbreu Destination Management Portugal 10 events listed 38.571779 -7.906986Venue Map & Directions Cathedral of \u00c9vora Largo do Marqu\u00eas de Marialva 809, 7000 \u00c9vora Portugal Get DirectionsFeatured Hotels in \u00c9voraINn MURUS GUEST HOUSE from EUR 38Pousada Convento de Evora from EUR 107Mont'sobro House from EUR 25Hotel Riviera from EUR 55 More Hotels Invite your friends, colleagues, customers and clients to this eventI am Interested Invite People to AttendRelated EventsMar 302019 Southern California Model United Nations Los Angeles, USAApr 072019 ENC Conference Monterey, USAApr 082019 Twist Conference for Women Charlotte, USAJun 072019 REBEL EM Conference San Antonio, USAJun 162019 Planet Philanthropy St. Augustine, USAMore Events Around \u00c9voraJul 072019 International Meiofauna Conference \u00c9vora, Portugal All EventsNever miss out on good eventsSUBSCRIBEor via All EventsConferencesMiscellaneousPortugal Android iPhone AboutCareer (Join us)Media & Press ReleasesHelp Center / FAQFeedbackProducts & ServicesEvent Management SoftwareEvent AppsEvent WebsiteEvent MarketingList your EventOrganizer LoginCompanyTestimonialsWidgetAll Event - by Country | by IndustryTrade Shows - by Country | by IndustryConferences - by Country | by IndustryTop 100 Events By continuing past this page, you agree to our Terms of Service, Cookie Policy, Privacy Policy and Content Policies. All trademarks are properties of their respective owners. \u00a9 2014-2019 - Tentimes Online Private Limited. All rights reserved.", "NASA Visible Earth: Rock Glacier on Mount Sopris A catalog of NASA images and animations of our home planet Skip Navigation (key s). Home Terms of Use Browse By: Sensor Collections Topic Rock Glacier on Mount Sopris Credit: NASA image created by Jesse Allen, Earth Observatory, using data provided courtesy of the NASA/GSFC/MITI/ERSDAC/JAROS, and U.S./Japan ASTER Science Team. Not all glaciers are made of ice. Some glaciers are made of rock. More accurately, they are composed of a combination of ice and rock. Opinions vary on how rock glaciers form, but geologists generally agree that one condition necessary for the formation and longevity of these natural formations is a climate cold enough to sustain permafrost. Rock glaciers that are big enough to have their own internal microclimates can maintain cool temperatures for some time, even when local temperatures are rising. Compared to ordinary glaciers, rock glaciers are rare, and may look like a rocky field shaped like a glacier. While regular glaciers flow, rock glaciers \u201ccreep.\u201d Some fine examples of rock glaciers live in Colorado, including this glacier on the slope of Mount Sopris in the Elk Mountains, in the western part of the state. The Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER) on NASA\u2019s Terra satellite acquired this image on July 8, 2006. This is a false-color image that mimics photo-like, natural color. Green indicates vegetation, dark blue indicates water, gray indicates bare rock, and white indicates ice or snow. Shaped vaguely like an amphitheatre but stretched out like putty, the rock glacier stretches off the northeast slope of Mount Sopris\u2019s east summit. Not far from the glacier\u2019s tip is lush-looking vegetation. Off the east edge of the glacier are some small bodies of water. The rate of movement for rock glaciers can vary, depending on each glacier\u2019s composition, underlying slope, and local weather conditions. In Colorado, the creep rates of rock glaciers range from less than 20 centimeters (8 inches) to more than 61 centimeters (24 inches) per year. Further Reading: Matthews, V., KellerLynn, K., and Fox, B., Eds. (2003). Messages in Stone: Colorado\u2019s Colorful Geology. Denver: Colorado Geological Survey. About Geology. Rock Glacier. Accessed August 24, 2006. Frauenfelder, R. Regional-scale Modelling of the Occurrence and Dynamics of Rockglaciers and the Distribution of Paleopermafrost. Accessed October 11, 2006. Images & Animations File File Dimensions mtsopris_ast_2005189.jpg 540x405 JPEG mtsopris_ast_2005189_lrg.jpg 2000x2000 JPEG 2 MB Note: Often times, due to the size, browsers have a difficult time opening and displaying images. If you experiece an error when clicking on an image link, please try directly downloading the image (using a right click, save as method) to view it locally. This image originally appeared on the Earth Observatory. Click here to view the full, original record. Subscribe to the RSS Feed Privacy Policy and Important Notices Contact Visible Earth National Climate Assessment Climate Resilience Toolkit Climate Data Initiative Webmaster: Paul Przyborski NASA Official: Robert Levy Database Updated: March 18, 2019 The Visible Earth is part of the EOS Project Science Office located at NASA Goddard Space Flight Center.", "(PDF) Paleo-Eskimo kitchen midden preservation in permafrost under future climate conditions at Qajaa, West Greenland | Bjarne Gr\u00f8nnow - Academia.edu Skip to main content Log InSign UpLog InSign Upmore\u00a0Job BoardAboutPressBlogPeoplePapersTermsPrivacyCopyright\u00a0We're Hiring!\u00a0Help Centerless pdfPaleo-Eskimo kitchen midden preservation in permafrost under future climate conditions at Qajaa, West GreenlandJournal of Archaeological Science, 2011Bjarne Gr\u00f8nnowDownload with GoogleDownload with Facebookor download with emailPaleo-Eskimo kitchen midden preservation in permafrost under future climate conditions at Qajaa, West GreenlandDownloadPaleo-Eskimo kitchen midden preservation in permafrost under future climate conditions at Qajaa, West GreenlandBjarne Gr\u00f8nnowLoading PreviewSorry, preview is currently unavailable. You can download the paper by clicking the button above.Related PapersGreenland Climate ChangeBy Jette Arneborg and Marit-Solveig SeidenkrantzThe thermal state of permafrost in the nordic area during the international polar year 2007\u20132009By Ole HumlumImpacts of peat and vegetation on permafrost degradation under climate warmingBy Ming-ko WooResilience and vulnerability of permafrost to climate changeThis article is one of a selection of papers from The Dynamics of Change in Alaska\u2019s Boreal Forests: Resilience and Vulnerability in Response to Climate WarmingBy Mikhail KanevskiyREAD PAPERDownload pdf \u00d7CloseLog InLog In\u00a0with\u00a0FacebookLog In\u00a0with\u00a0GoogleorEmail:Password:Remember me on this computeror\u00a0reset passwordEnter the email address you signed up with and we'll email you a reset link. Need an account?\u00a0Click here to sign up AboutBlogPeoplePapersJob BoardAdvertise\u00a0We're Hiring!\u00a0Help CenterFind new research papers in:PhysicsChemistryBiologyHealth SciencesEcologyEarth SciencesCognitive ScienceMathematicsComputer ScienceTermsPrivacyCopyrightAcademia \u00a92019", "Variability of carbonate pedofeatures in a loess-paleosol sequence and their use for paleoreconstructions | SpringerLink Skip to main content This service is more advanced with JavaScript available, learn more at http://activatejavascript.org Advertisement Hide SpringerLink Search SpringerLink Search Home Log in Journal of Mountain Science Journal of Mountain ScienceJune 2009, Volume 6, Issue\u00a02, pp 155\u2013161 | Cite asVariability of carbonate pedofeatures in a loess-paleosol sequence and their use for paleoreconstructionsAuthorsAuthors and affiliationsI.\u00a0KovdaS.\u00a0SychevaM.\u00a0LebedevaS.\u00a0InozemtzevArticleFirst Online: 10 May 2009 95 Downloads 8 Citations AbstractCarbonate pedofeatures were studied in details in a loess-paleosol pedocomplex near Kursk, in the central part of the European Plain. The soils studied included a modern Chernozem and five Pleistocene paleosols. Carbonate morphologies and distributions were described in the field. Various morphologies were sampled for further studies including micromorphology in thin sections and submicroscopic studies under a scanning electron microscope. The complex approach of investigation at macro-, micro-, and submicroscopic levels found that most of carbonate pedofeatures are secondary and multiphase. Many of them are related to cryogenic features. The general trend was of decreasing carbonate content in the older paleosols except for increased content in the 1st and 3rd paleosols. Most of carbonate morphologies are similar in the modern soil and paleosols, but pseudomycelium was found only in the modern Chernozem, while soft masses and impregnations are associated with the paleosols. Detailed study on carbonate attributes revealed their specific features in the modern soil and in paleosols. Veins have dissolution features under the modern environment and seem to reprecipitate in form of pseudomycelium. Coatings in paleosols at a depth of the 1st paleosol include specific fine tubes. Powdery soft masses and impregnations in the paleosols are strongly related to cryogenic fissures and paleopermafrost level. Under SEM they consist of tiny crystals, much smaller than in regular soft masses. Several types of hard concretions were identified: rounded, irregular and platy. Small concretions in the modern Chernozem have similar morphology and similar 14C-age as the rounded concretions of the upper paleosols. They are expected to represent the same generation of concretions. Platy concretions fill the bottom part of the large fissures. The 14C-age of hard concretions varies from 3310\u00b180 yrs. B.P in the 1st paleosol up to 20 400 yrs. B.P. in the 3rd. As a result we found the reflection of several wet-dry and cold-warm stages in carbonate morphologies and distributions. High variability of carbonates at macro-, micro- and submicroscopic levels indicates several generations and multiphase formation of carbonate pedofeatures in the loess-paleosol pedocomplex. Carbonate pedofeatures in the examined pedocomplex are more informative for the study of late Pleistocene and Holocene climatic cycles rather than characterization of a single paleosol.KeywordsLoess-paleosol pedocomplex\u00a0pedogenic carbonates\u00a0macr- and microforms\u00a0This is a preview of subscription content, log in to check access.PreviewUnable to display preview.\u00a0Download preview PDF.Unable to display preview.\u00a0Download preview PDF.ReferenceArinushkina E.V. 1970. Manual for Chemical Analyses of Soils. Moscow. Pp. 487. (In Russian)Google ScholarBal L. 1975a. Carbonate in Soil: A Theoretical Consideration on, and Proposal for its Fabric Analysis. 1. Crystic, Calcic and Fibrous Plasmic Fabric. Netherland Journal of Agricultural Science 23: 18\u201335.Google ScholarBal L. 1975b. Carbonate in Soil: A Theoretical Consideration on, and Proposal for its Fabric Analysis. 2. Crystal Tubes, Intercalary Crystals, K Fabric. Netherland Journal of Agricultural Science 23: 163\u2013176.Google ScholarBecze-De\u00e1k J., Langohr R. and Verrecchia E.P. 1997. Small Scale Secondary CaCO3 Accumulations in Selected Sections of the European Loess Belt. Morphological Forms and Potential for Paleoenvironmental Reconstruction. Geoderma 76: 221\u2013252.CrossRefGoogle ScholarBoguckyj A.B., Lanczont M., Lacka B., Madeyska T. and P. Zawidzki. 2006. Stable Isotopic Composition of Carbonates in Quaternary Sediments of the Skala Podil\u2019ska Sequence (Ukraine). Quaternary International 152\u2013153: 3\u201313.CrossRefGoogle ScholarBronger A. and Heinkele Th. 1989. Micromorphology and Genesis of Paleosols in the Luochuan Loess Section, China: Pedostratigraphic and Environmental Implications. Geoderma 45: 123\u2013143.CrossRefGoogle ScholarChadwick O.A., Sowers J.M. and Amundson R.G. 1988. Morphology of Calcite Crystals in Clast Coatings from four Soils in the Mojave Desert Region. Soil Science Society of America Journal 53: 211\u2013219.CrossRefGoogle ScholarGile L.H., Peterson F.F. and Grossman R.B. 1965. The K-horizon: a Master Soil Horizon of Carbonate Accumulation. Soil Science 99: 74\u201392.CrossRefGoogle ScholarGoudie A.S. 1983. Calcrete. In: Goudie A.S. and Pye K. (eds.), Chemical Sediments and Geomorphology. Academic Press, London, New York. Pp. 93\u2013131.Google ScholarSkripkin V.V. and Kovalyukh N.N. 1998. Recent Developments in the Procedures Used at the SSCER Laboratory for the Routine Preparation of Lithium Carbide. Radiocarbon. 40: 211\u2013214.Google ScholarLebedeva I.I. and Ovechkin S.V. 1975. New Formations of Carbonates in Chernozems of the Left Bank Ukraine. Pochvovedeniye 11: 14\u201330.Google ScholarMachette M.N. 1985. Calcic soils of the South-western United States. Geological Society of America Special Paper No 203. Pp. 1\u201321.Google ScholarNetterberg F., 1980. Geology of Southern African Calcretes. I. Terminology, Description, Macrofeatures and Classification. Transactions Geological Society of South Africa 83: 255\u2013283.Google ScholarPolyakov A.N. 1989. Micromorphological Investigation of Calcite in Chernozems of the European Part of the USSR. Pochvovedeniye 2: 79\u201386 (In Russian).Google ScholarSehgal J.L. and Stoops G. 1972. Pedogenic Calcite Accumulation in Arid and Semi-arid Regions of the Indo-Gangetic Alluvial Plain of Erstwhile Punjab (India) \u2014 Their Morphology and Origin. Geoderma 8: 59\u201372.CrossRefGoogle ScholarSycheva S.A. 1998. New Data on the Composition and Evolution of the Mezin Loess-paleosol Complex in the Russian Plain. Eurasian Soil Science 31(10): 1062\u20131074.Google ScholarSycheva S.A. 2004. Aleksandrov quarry. Late Pleistocene- Holocene Cover Complex: Paleosols, Loesses and Buried Balka. Polish Geological Institute Special Papers 13. Pp. 175\u2013182.Google ScholarSycheva S.A., Gunova V., Kovalyukh, N, Semenov V. 2002. The Middle Valdai Pedostratigraphy on the Russian Plain Juging from Data on Buried Gully Sediments of the Late Pleistocene. Upper Pliocene of the Southern Urals Region and its Significance for Correlation of the Eastern and Western Parts of Europe. INQUA. Commission on Stratigraphy and Subcommission of European Quaternary Stratigraphy (SEQS), Ufa, Russia.Google ScholarWilding L.P., Drees L.R. and Woodruffs C.M. Mineralogy and Microfabrics of Limestone Soils on Stepped Landscapes in Central Texas. In: S. Shoba, M. Gerasimova and R. Miedema (Eds.). Proceed. X Int. Working Meeting on Soil Micromorphology, Moscow, Russia, July 8\u201313, 1996. Soil Micromorphology: Studies on Soil Diversity, Diagnostics and Dynamics. Moscow-Wageningen. 1997. Pp. 204\u2013218Google ScholarCopyright information\u00a9\u00a0Science Press, Institute of Mountain Hazards and Environment, CAS and Springer-Verlag GmbH\u00a02009Authors and AffiliationsI.\u00a0Kovda1Email authorS.\u00a0Sycheva1M.\u00a0Lebedeva2S.\u00a0Inozemtzev31.Institute of GeographyMoscowRussia2.Institute of Soil ScienceMoscowRussia3.Dept. of Soil ScienceMoscow State UniversityMoscowRussia About this article Cite this article as: Kovda, I., Sycheva, S., Lebedeva, M. et al. J. Mt. Sci. (2009) 6: 155. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11629-009-1032-4 Received 07 January 2009 Accepted 14 March 2009 First Online 10 May 2009 DOI https://doi.org/10.1007/s11629-009-1032-4 Publisher Name SP Science Press Print ISSN 1672-6316 Online ISSN 1993-0321 About this journal Reprints and Permissions Personalised recommendations Cite article How to cite? .RIS Papers Reference Manager RefWorks Zotero .ENW EndNote .BIB BibTeX JabRef Mendeley Buy options Actions Log in to check access Buy article (PDF) USD\u00a039.95 Unlimited access to the article Instant PDF download Rent this article via DeepDyve Learn about institutional subscriptions Cite article How to cite? .RIS Papers Reference Manager RefWorks Zotero .ENW EndNote .BIB BibTeX JabRef Mendeley Advertisement Hide Over 10 million scientific documents at your fingertips Switch Edition Academic Edition Corporate Edition Home Impressum Legal information Privacy statement How we use cookies Accessibility Contact us Springer Nature \u00a9 2018 Springer Nature Switzerland AG. Part of Springer Nature. Not logged in Not affiliated 70.59.11.147", "Colloquium Series Spring 2018 | Department of Geology and Environmental Science | University of Pittsburgh Jump to navigation University of Pittsburgh Search form Search Pitt Home Dietrich School Find People Department of Geology and Environmental Science Prospective Undergraduates > Menu AboutImportant Dates Directions and Location News Events PeopleFaculty Instructors Postdocs & Research Staff Graduate Students Staff Emeriti Adjunct Faculty Visitors UndergraduateOverview of Programs Geology (BS) Environmental Science (BS) Environmental Studies (BA) GIS Certificate Register for Classes Courses GraduateOverview How to Apply Financial Support PhD Program MS Program Professional MS Program For Current Graduate Students Courses ResearchOverview Tectonic, Volcanic and Surface Processes Planetary Science and Astrobiology Paleoclimate and Environmental Change Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry Energy Geosciences Hydrologic Processes Dissertations & Theses FacilitiesOverview Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometers Mobile Air Quality Research Laboratory Regional Stable Isotope Laboratory for Earth and Environmental Science Research Organic Mass Spectrometers Elemental Analysis Instrumentation Separation Instrumentation Additional Facilities AlumniAlumni News Graduate Updates Undergraduate Updates Distinguished Alumni Giving Opportunities Nominations for Alumni Awards Colloquium Series Spring 2018 February 22, 2018 - 4:00pm Thaw 102 Dr. Dorothy Merritts Harry W. & Mary B. Huffnagle Professor of Geosciences Program Chair of Environmental Studies Franklin & Marschall College Legacy landscapes:\u00a0 Freeze-dried, thawed permafrost\u00a0landscapes, breached dams, and wetland-floodplain stream restoration, eastern United States Decades of research on the geomorphology of the mid-Atlantic US make it timely to synthesize long-term (104 \u2013 106) rates of geologic erosion and sediment generation with paleo-ecological and geomorphic records of landscape change. Such a synthesis reveals that legacy landscape effects from Pleistocene cold-climate conditions pre-determined Holocene warm-climate landforms and processes throughout the mid-Atlantic region. These periglacial landscape legacies likewise pre-determined the response of modern streams to base-level change from breaching (or removal) of 18th-19th century milldams. Most modern channels are in a transient state, one characterized by incision through historic and Holocene sediment into underlying Pleistocene cold-climate deposits and landforms.\u00a0 North of the latitude of present-day Annapolis, Maryland (~39\uf0b0) relict landforms provide a record of paleo-permafrost, consistent with previous paleocological work that indicates tundra vegetation during the late Pleistocene. Using lidar, orthoimagery, and geomorphic and paleoecological studies, we and our collaborators find extensive networks of thermal contraction polygons in shale bedrock; ubiquitous gelifluction sheets and lobes up to 10s of m thick on side slopes and valley bottoms; retrogressive thaw slumps and other thermokarst features; and water tracks similar to those in the Dry Valleys of Antarctica. We dated the sand infill within a relict thermal contract wedge to 14.9 \uf0b1 1.8 ka (1 sigma weighted mean age for two OSL ages). Gelifluction on hillslopes produced poorly sorted, matrix-supported deposits indicative of mass movement under saturated conditions.\u00a0 These deposits accumulated in valley bottoms, leading to local aggradation. We have identified fluvial channel networks buried by colluvium north of ~39\uf0b0 latitude, but this paleo-climatic signature diminishes southward beyond the limits of paleo-permafrost.\u00a0 Holocene landscape stability was enhanced by Pleistocene cold-climate conditions that led to widespread coarse-grained colluvial deposition on hillslopes and valley bottoms.\u00a0 Our radiocarbon dating at dozens of mid-Atlantic sites, combined with paleo-seed and other macro-fossil analysis, indicates that valley bottom wetlands supplied by groundwater became established on a substrate of periglacial deposits during the early Holocene in low-order (1st to 3rd) watersheds. Oldest radiocarbon dates from organic-rich wetland soils typically are \u226411.2 ka, post-dating the Younger Dryas cold period. At one valley bottom location (Great Marsh, southeastern PA), our calibrated radiocarbon dates of 19.1-19.9 kyrs BP for organic matter in silt immediately below a 12.1-13.2 kyrs BP organic-rich soil indicate a late Pleistocene-Holocene transition erosional disconformity between ~13.2 and 19.1 kyr BP. Multiple lines of evidence suggest this was a time of intense eolian activity and flushing of some sediment along valley bottoms. By early Holocene wetlands had become established at groundwater level throughout the region, and many persisted continuously until European settlement.\u00a0 Sedimentation rates in Holocene wetlands were low, typically <0.1 mm/yr.\u00a0 Widespread mill damming for water power, however, buried many valley bottom wetlands, with 18th-19th c. sedimentation rates at least 10-100 x greater. Regional studies in the eastern US indicate long-term, low erosion rates of ~8 to 15 m m.y.\u20131, whereas historic hillslope erosion rates are estimated to have been ~100 x greater and contemporary sediment yields up to 10 times greater (Reusser et al, 2015). Our work with LiDAR DEM differencing (acquisition in 2008 and 2014) indicates that historic reservoir sediment stored upstream of breached milldams is eroded rapidly as knickpoints propagate through this sediment.\u00a0 These erosion rates can be 1000 times greater than long-term geologic rates. Furthermore, Pleistocene colluvium beneath this historic sediment is more readily scoured because of high stream banks after incision and can enhance bank erosion as gravel bars of reworked colluvium develop along meander bends.\u00a0 In essence, valley bottoms with stored historic sediment in the eastern US are in a transient state for which \u201cmemory\u201d strongly affects modern processes and rates of erosion. Department E-Newsletter Check out our 2018 E-Newsletter! Pittsburgh Collaboratory for Water Research, Education, and Outreach The\u00a0Pittsburgh Collaboratory for Water Research, Education, and Outreach\u00a0is a platform\u00a0for knowledge sharing, collaboration, and training dedicated to applying science-based\u00a0approaches to resolve local, regional, and global water sustainability issues. Climate and Global Change Center We are a multidisciplinary center comprised of researchers from different departments throughout the University of Pittsburgh. Our aim is to advance research collaborations among departments to develop cross-disciplinary projects that focus on climate change. Footer Logo Footer Contact Block The Kenneth P. Dietrich School of Arts and Sciences University of Pittsburgh 4107 O'Hara Street SRCC, Room 200 Pittsburgh, PA 15260-3332 412-624-8780 Copyright 2013\u20132019 Send feedback about this site", "Data for polar-regions research (Technical Report) | OSTI.GOV skip to main content Sign In Create Account U.S. Department of EnergyOffice of Scientific and Technical Information Search terms: Advanced search options Advanced Search OptionsAdvanced Search queries use a traditional Term Search. For more info, see our FAQ. All Fields: Title: Creator / Author: Identifier Numbers: Publication Date: to More Options ... Full Text: Resource Type: Journal Article Technical Report Data Software Patent Conference / Event Book / Monograph Program Document Thesis / Dissertation Video / Audio Miscellaneous Subject: Site: All Research Org: Sponsoring Org: Update Date: to Limit to INIS / NSA records only Limit to Nobel Prize winning records only Search Submit Submit Research Results Search Tools Public Access Policy Data Services & Dev Tools About FAQs News Sign In Create Account OSTI.GOV Technical Report: Data for polar-regions research Title: Data for polar-regions research Full Record Other Related Research Abstract Datasets available for polar research on global change topics are summarized. Emphasis is given to data that define the large, including rawinsonde data, surface meteorological observations, cloud drift winds, atmospheric analyses, sea ice, planetary radiation, and ocean forcing. Plans are discussed for making improved atmospheric analyses, using existing data. The use of CD-ROMs and DAT technologies for data distribution is discussed and selected CD-ROMs are listed. Authors: Jenne, R.L. Publication Date: Sun Mar 01 00:00:00 EST 1992 Research Org.: National Center for Atmospheric Research, Boulder, CO (United States) OSTI Identifier: 7161595 Alternate Identifier(s): OSTI ID: 7161595 Report Number(s): AD-P-007274/4/XAB Resource Type: Technical Report Resource Relation: Other Information: This article is from 'Proceedings of the International Conference on the Role of the Polar Regions in Global Change Held in Fairbanks, Alaska on 11-15 June 1990. Volume 1', AD-A253 027, p107-111 Country of Publication: United States Language: English Subject: 54 ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCES; POLAR REGIONS; CLIMATIC CHANGE; CLOUDS; ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACTS; ICE; SEAS; SNOW; WIND; ATMOSPHERIC PRECIPITATIONS; SURFACE WATERS 540110* Citation Formats MLA APA Chicago Bibtex Jenne, R.L. Data for polar-regions research. United States: N. p., 1992. Web. Copy to clipboard Jenne, R.L. Data for polar-regions research. United States. Copy to clipboard Jenne, R.L. Sun . \"Data for polar-regions research\". United States. Copy to clipboard @article{osti_7161595, title = {Data for polar-regions research}, author = {Jenne, R.L.}, abstractNote = {Datasets available for polar research on global change topics are summarized. Emphasis is given to data that define the large, including rawinsonde data, surface meteorological observations, cloud drift winds, atmospheric analyses, sea ice, planetary radiation, and ocean forcing. Plans are discussed for making improved atmospheric analyses, using existing data. The use of CD-ROMs and DAT technologies for data distribution is discussed and selected CD-ROMs are listed.}, doi = {}, journal = {}, number = , volume = , place = {United States}, year = {Sun Mar 01 00:00:00 EST 1992}, month = {Sun Mar 01 00:00:00 EST 1992} } Copy to clipboard Technical Report: Other availability Please see Document Availability for additional information on obtaining the full-text document. Library patrons may search WorldCat to identify libraries that may hold this item. Keep in mind that many technical reports are not cataloged in WorldCat. Save / Share: Export Metadata Endnote RIS CSV XML Save to My Library You must Sign In or Create an Account in order to save documents to your library. LinkedIn Pinterest Tumblr Similar records in OSTI.GOV collections: Paleoenviromental data from less-investigated polar regions Technical Report Vaikmae, R. The Arctic holds extensive records of past climatic and environmental changes. Stable isotope variations in polar ice are in many cases important records of paleoclimatic information. Deep ice cores from Antarctica and Greenland, reaching back through the last glaciation, have provided valuable information about the Earth's climate in the past. This paper discusses the oxygen-18 variations in intermediate-depth ice cores from smaller ice caps of Svalbard, Severnaya Zemlya (North Land) and from the marginal area of the Antarctic ice sheet, covering the time span from 1000 to 8000 years B.P. All profiles studied clearly reflect the main climatic events duringmore\u00a0\u00bb this time interval. However, small shifts in time exist between details on different curves. Most probably this is due to certain asynchronity in climatic changes in the various regions. There are extensive areas in the Arctic, especially in its eastern sector, where no glaciers currently exist and, possibly, in some areas never existed in the past either. These are the areas of permafrost where several forms of ice occur Within the ground. The source water for most types of ground ice originates from precipitation, but unlike glacier ice, the range of mechanisms for the formation of ground ice is very large, which considerably complicates the interpretation of their isotopic characteristics. For paleoclimatic and paleopermafrost reconstructions, the isotopic content of polygonal wedge ice seems to be most promising. The attempts to use isotopic records from segregated ice for paleoenvironmental research will also be discussed.\u00ab\u00a0less Collaborative research on the Northeast Water Polynya: NEWP92 hydrographic data report. USCGC Polar Sea cruise, July 15--August 15, 1992 Technical Report Wallace, D.W.R. ; Behrens, W.J. ; Hopkins, T.S. ; ... The Northeast Water Polynya (NEW) off the northeast coast of Greenland was the focus of two cruises aboard the USCGC Polar Sea during the summers of 1992 and 1993. The cruises were supported by the National Science Foundation Arctic Systems Science (ARCSS) program and were part of the Arctic Ocean Science Board`s International Arctic Polynya Program. The Polar Sea cruises were designed as multidisciplinary studies to test hypotheses about the mechanisms of heat, water and carbon flow within and beyond the boundaries of the polynya. Preliminary results of the 1992 study have been described elsewhere. A collection of papers arisingmore\u00a0\u00bb from the 1992 cruise have been published in a Special Section of the Journal of Geophysical Research. This data report presents the hydrographic and basic chemical observations made from CTD/Rosette casts during the 1992 cruise. The station positions cruise are plotted in Figure 1. Also included in the report are selected section plots and vertical profiles. A total of 130 CTD casts were made during the cruise, measuring pressure, temperature, conductivity, dissolved oxygen, fluorescence and light transmission. Discrete samples were collected in 10-liter, rosette-mounted, Niskin bottles and analyzed, from most casts, for: salinity, dissolved nutrients, dissolved oxygen, anthropogenic halocarbons (e.g., Freon gases), pigments, particulate organic carbon and nitrogen. Suspended particulate matter was analyzed at selected stations and these data were used to calibrate the CTD-transmissometer. Samples were collected from selected stations and depths for tritium and helium analyses, carbonate chemistry, as well as for measurements of bacterial abundance.\u00ab\u00a0less DOI: 10.2172/102497 Full Text Available Auroral x-ray contamination of the low energy proton spectrometer on the S3-2 satellite in the polar regions. Report for 1 January-31 August 1980 Technical Report Boyle, R.P. ; Parsignault, D.R. The Low Energy Proton Spectrometer (LEPS) on board the Air Force S3-2 polar orbiting satellite recorded, at polar latitudes, high anomalous counts coming from the auroral zone direction, over the December 1975 through April 1976 operational period. Despite the low sensitivity of the Si(Li) LEPS detector to X-rays, bremsstrahlung from precipitating electrons in the hundred keV energy range is given as the source of these observations. Solar-cycle variations of coronal neutral lines and polar regions activity Technical Report Makarov, V.I. ; Makarova, V.V. ; Koutchmy, S. ; ... Observations of the corona, of prominences, of polar faculae and of large scale magnetic fields show solar activity over all latitudes, in contrast with sunspot activity, which is limited to mid-latitudes. The global behavior of the solar activity is considered here thanks to the analysis of chromospheric synoptic maps which include the location of H/alpha/ and Ca II k prominences. The process of migration of neutral lines during the cycle (supposed to represent the large-scale coronal magnetic field) is shown. After subsequent averaging of the maps, a discrete number of latitude zones is found: not more than 10, the mostmore\u00a0\u00bb probable number being 3 or 5. This suggests the occurrence of dominant modes (1=3 and 1=5) of the large-scale coronal magnetic field and inferred coronal structures for different epochs of the solar cycle. The geoactivity of coronal streamers could be related to the modes, noticing the dipole (1=1) mode is almost absent. A more-detailed analysis points to the importance of the poleward migration of neutral lines (with v = 5 to 40 micro sec-1). The nonsymmetric behavior of the N and S hemisphere as well as the erratic behavior of the corresponding sunspot activity in each hemisphere is emphasized, which reflects the behavior of both the radial component and the toroidal component of the field.\u00ab\u00a0less Coherence scales of wavefield during propagation through naturally disturbed ionosphere in the polar cap, auroral, and equatorial regions Technical Report Basu, S. ; Basu, S. ; Livingston, R.C. Phase and intensity scintillation measurements have been made at low latitudes in the equatorial anomaly region, and at high latitudes in the auroral oval and the polar cap regions, using phase coherent transmissions at 250 MHz from stationary and near stationary satellites. The observations pertain to periods of high solar activity when intense scintillation activity is recorded at each of the above observing sites. This data set has been utilized to study the reduction of coherence times of intensity and complex amplitude scintillation with increasing strength of scattering. Estimates of coherence scales of intensity and complex amplitude scintillation at 250more\u00a0\u00bb MHz are provided which indicate that coherent scales of scintillation are typically of the order of hundreds of meters at high latitudes but approach values as small as tens of meters in the equatorial anomaly region. The phase spectral index in the nightside auroral oval is observed to be much steeper (p sub psi = .4) than those typically observed in the equatorial (p sub psi = 2.4) or polar cap regions (p sub psi approx. -2.3). It shows the importance of large scale phase variations in the nightside auroral oval. Under strong scatter conditions, the coherence times of complex amplitude scintillation are shown to asymptotically approach a value which is 1.4 times the coherence time of intensity scintillation. This result is consistent with the theoretical predictions for Rayleigh statistics.\u00ab\u00a0less Similar Records Website Policies / Important Links Contact Us", "Circumpolar Active-Layer Permafrost System (CAPS) - Data.gov Skip to content Skip to content Jump to Content Search for: Search data.gov Data Topics Agriculture Climate Consumer Ecosystems Education Energy Finance Health Local Government Manufacturing Maritime Ocean Public Safety Science & Research Impact Applications Developers Contact Data Catalog Organizations Home Datasets Home National Oceanic and ... Submit Data Story Report Data Issue Circumpolar Active-Layer Permafrost System (CAPS) Metadata Updated: September 27, 2015 The Circumpolar Active-Layer Permafrost System (CAPS) contains over 100 data sets pertaining to permafrost and frozen ground topics. It also contains detailed metadata records describing over 100 additional data sets available at other GGD nodes around the world. Dozens of contributors submitted data collections representing global sites. This compilation of data and information products is intended for a broad audience including the scientific and engineering communities, educators, and policy makers. The data published on CAPS is available through the Frozen Ground Data Center (FGDC) database. Access & Use Information License: U.S. Government Work Downloads & Resources Web PageHTML 49 views Documentation URL Link is ok Openness score Visit page Web Pageapplication/vnd.lotus-organizer Link is ok Openness score Download Web Page Link is ok Openness score Visit page Web Page Link is ok Openness score Visit page Web Pageapplication/vnd.lotus-organizer Link is ok Openness score Download Dates Metadata Date August 13, 2015 Metadata Created Date September 27, 2015 Metadata Updated Date September 27, 2015 Reference Date(s) January 1, 2003 (publication) Frequency Of Update asNeeded Metadata Source ISO-19139 ISO-19139 Metadata Download Metadata \u00b7 View Full Metadata Harvested from NOAA CSW Harvest Source atmosphere international arcti... united states of am... southern europe north america soil properties scandanavia continent boreholes mongolia united kingdom add geocryology solar radiation soil classification argentina norway nsidc thermokarst land surface temper... cryopedology field investigations gtn-p amd belgium cryosols kazakhstan meteorology terrestrial hydrosp... netherlands frozen ground national snow and i... remote sensing denmark thermal properties topographic survey mountain permafrost circumpolar active ... switzerland snow/ice western europe surface air tempera... terminology cryosphere greenland global change maste... climate change glaciation geothermal gradient canada gcmd asia paleoclimate south america permafrost features periglacial processes permafrost properties arctic environmenta... south atlantic ocean active layer europe slope processes freeze/thaw ggd china international perma... modeling geographic region seasonally frozen g... antarctic master di... sediments permafrost temperature seasonal freeze/thaw periglacial features permafrost software romania ipa eastern asia africa aedd austria southern ocean diurnal freeze/thaw earth science gis vertical location eastern europe france permafrost extent land surface calm atmospheric tempera... bedrock thaw british isles north atlantic ocean frost tundra southern africa ease-grid geophysics chile hydrology hydrogeology spain soil temperature sweden patterned ground russian federation land temperature paleo-permafrost russia discontinuous perma... talik south georgia island svalbard and jan mayen soils engineering permafrost distribu... global geocryologic... continuous permafrost italy south africa land records geology snow vegetation south shetland islands iceland arctic mid-latitude mapping rock glaciers germany ice-wedge polygons monitoring bibliographies atlantic ocean northern europe bts measurements global terrestrial ... poland air temperature ocean soil moisture southcentral asia ground ice Additional Metadata Resource Type Dataset Metadata Date August 13, 2015 Metadata Created Date September 27, 2015 Metadata Updated Date September 27, 2015 Reference Date(s) January 1, 2003 (publication) Responsible Party University of Southampton (Principal Investigator); National Snow and Ice Data Center (Point of Contact); Geological Survey of Canada (Principal Investigator); Uppsala University (Principal Investigator); The University Centre in Svalbard (Principal Investigator); Russian Academy of Sciences, Siberian Branch (Principal Investigator); University of Delaware (Principal Investigator); Lund University (Principal Investigator); VAW-ETH (Principal Investigator); University of Southhampton (Principal Investigator); International Permafrost Association (Principal Investigator); Siberian Branch, Russian Academy of Sciences (Principal Investigator); University of Colorado (Principal Investigator) Contact Email jerrybrown@igc.apc.org Access Constraints There are no restrictions on access to these data., There are no restrictions on use of these data. Please cite the data using the citation example given in the documentation. Please cite the CD itself as follows: International Permafrost Association, Data and Information Working Group, comp. Circumpolar Active-Layer Permafrost System (CAPS), version 1.0. CD-ROM available from National Snow and Ice Data Center, nsidc@nsidc.org. Boulder, Colorado: NSIDC, University of Colorado at Boulder. Bbox East Long 180 Bbox North Lat 90 Bbox South Lat -90 Bbox West Long -180 Coupled Resource Frequency Of Update asNeeded Guid noaa.ncei.nsidc.G01175 Harvest Object Id efbcfcfe-2df3-4dd4-b2aa-0ba583d25d29 Harvest Source Id 2aed8e29-fc5b-4cde-aa66-fb1118fd705e Harvest Source Title NOAA CSW Harvest Source Licence Metadata Language Metadata Type geospatial Progress complete Spatial Data Service Type Spatial Reference System Spatial Harvester True Temporal Extent Begin Unknown Temporal Extent End Unknown Didn't find what you're looking for? Suggest a dataset here. Federal National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce Topics Climate Arctic Permafrost and Arctic Landscapes Arctic Peoples and Ecosystems Contact jerrybrown@igc.apc.org Share on Social Sites Google+ Twitter Facebook Federal National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Department of Commerce Dataset extent Map tiles & Data by OpenStreetMap, under CC BY SA. Data.Gov 2.0 Privacy and Website Policies USA.GOV PERFORMANCE.GOV About Open Government Blog Metrics Events Login Twitter Github", "The Netherlands - International Permafrost Association Arctic Portal AP Community Portlets Arctic Council Science Organizations Maps Library Acronyms Links Search International Permafrost Association Fostering permafrost research to the ends of the Earth Search ... Member login Contact \ufeff Menu HomeAbout Us Antarctic Permafrost and Periglacial EnvironmentsCoastal and Offshore Permafrost Dynamics (COPD)CryosolGlaciers and Permafrost Hazards in High Mountain Slopes (GAPHAZ)Isotopes and Geochemistry of PermafrostPeriglacial Landforms, Processes and ClimatePermafrost and Climate Modeling and Mapping Subgroup Planetary Permafrost and AstrobiologyPermafrost Engineering Subgroup on Engineering Geology for Development in Permafrost Regions Task Force on Remote SensingTask Force on Subglacial PermafrostStanding Committee on Data, Information and CommunicationsStanding Committee on Education and OutreachInternational Advisory Committee for ICOPCarbon Pools in Permafrost Regions (CAPP)Arctic Circumpolar Coastal Observatory Network (ACCONET)Arctic Coastal Dynamics (ACD)International Polar Year (2007-2009) OfficersCountry MembersConstitutionResolutionsExternal RelationsStanding Committees ANTPASEducation & Outreach HistoryBecome a Member Activities Action GroupsInterest Groups Permafrost and Carbon Budgets Core Projects PRP IPA Awards Pewe AwardMelnikov AwardLifetime Award Outreach Outreach ActivitiesPYRN Meetings International ConferencesRegional Conferences Publications IPA Newsletter - Frozen GroundIPA Country ReportsPPP ReportsConference ProceedingsReports and MinutesHandbookGlossaryOccasional Publications What is Permafrost?International Report \"State of the Arctic Coast 2010\" Products Permafrost Data IPA Permafrost MapGTN-P Workshop 2015GTN-P Workshop 2013GTN-P Workshop 2011TSPCALM Mailing ListCourses (IUCP)Media PrintGalleriesPodcasts Member Area Home Publications IPA Country Reports 2014 The Netherlands International Permafrost Association Country Reports The Netherlands Print Email Paleopermafrost Under the co-ordination of Prof. Jef Vandenberghe the IPA- Action Group has terminated the project 'Permafrost extension during the Last Glacial Maximum in the northern hemisphere and derived mean annual temperatures'. The map of maximum permafrost extension towards the end of the last glacial is published in Boreas 43-3 (2014) together with a number of related papers. The project will be continued in a new action group, coordinated by Prof. Huijun Jin. Carbon exchange from permafrost soils and ecosystems Research on the carbon cycle and greenhouse gas emission of present-day permafrost environments is conducted by VU University Amsterdam (Prof A.J. Dolman, Dr. J. van Huissteden) and Wageningen University (Dr. M. Heijmans). The research projects in Siberia are conducted in close collaboration with Russian counterparts (Russian Academy of Sciences - IBPC, Dr. T.C. Maximov) and Z\u00fcrich University in Switzerland, Dr. Schaepman-Strub.At the Kytalyk reserve near Chokurdagh in the Indigirka lowlands (VU and Wageningen University) research focusses on CO2 and CH4 fluxes of tundra ecosystems on continuous permafrost. This site is a primary site in the EU Framework 7 PAGE21 project and moreover closely collaborates with Japanese researchers in the GRENE-TEA project who have established research sites in the tundra-taiga transition south of Kytalyk near Chokurdagh.Starting in 2011, the CO2 and CH4 fluxes at the site have been measured with two eddy covariance towers, one fixed reference tower on an ancient drained thaw lake basin, and one roving tower, set up alternating at the edge of the river floodplain and the edge of a thaw lake (Figure 1). In 2014, the field activities for two PhD projects at Kytalyk, conducting eddy covariance and chamber flux measurements and monitoring of permafrost changes have finished. Flux measurements at the site will be continued in 2015, financed by PAGE21 and a new Dutch research programme, Netherlands Earth System Science Centre (NESSC). Within the framework of NESSC more focus will be laid on the carbon balance with thermokarst lakes. The site now has collected 11 years of CO2 flux data and 10 years of CH4 flux data. A synthesis publication is in progress. Figure 1. Eddy covariance tower for monitoring CO2 and CH4 fluxes set up near thaw lake bank at Kytalyk research station. The Wageningen University team continued their measurements in two long-term field experiments: a Betula nana shrub removal experiment and a soil warming experiment. Removing the shrub part of the vegetation initiated thawing of ice-rich permafrost, resulting in collapse of the originally elevated shrub patches into waterlogged depressions within five years. This thaw pond development shifted the plots from a methane sink into a methane source (Nauta et al. 2014, Nature Climate Change). By 2014, one of the 10-m diameter removal plots has become almost completely a pond (Figure 2). In the soil warming experiment, solar panels feed heating cables buried at 15 cm depth in the ground (Figure 3). This additional heating increased thawing depth with consequences for soil moisture, soil available nutrients and vegetation composition. In 2014 we sampled both above and belowground biomass to test whether relatively deep-rooting graminoids expand at the cost of shallow-rooting low shrubs with increased thawing. Figure 2. Shrub removal plot developing into pond. Figure 3. Soil warming experiment located in tussock tundra. Effect of paleo-permafrost on hydraulic properties of sediments The Dutch Geological Survey (subdivision od TNO) is conducting research on the hydraulic properties of aquifers and aquicludes in Quaternary deposits in the Netherlands. Glacial till in the northern part of the Netherlands can be an important barrier for groundwater flow. Cryoturbation locally leads to sandy intrusions in the upper part of the till, lowering the hydraulic resistance (Figure 4). Recently the excavation of a new waterway in the province of Drenthe revealed cryoturbation structures (see Figure) and allowed in-situ measurements of hydraulic resistance in these cryoturbated zones. This research uses these and other results to determine the general depth and degree of cryoturbation in till in the Netherlands, and quantify its effects on hydraulic conductivity. Figure 4. Cryoturbatic structures in glacial till. Report prepared by Ko van Huissteden (\u00a0ko.van.huissteden@geo.falw.vu.nl) Prev Next IPA Newsletter - Frozen Ground IPA Country Reports PPP Reports Conference Proceedings Reports and Minutes Handbook Glossary Occasional Publications What is Permafrost? Contact: contact@ipa-permafrost.orgThe International Permafrost Association website is designed and hosted by the Arctic PortalCopyright \u00a9 2008-2015 International Permafrost Association All Rights Reserved IPA on Facebook IPA on Twitter IPA on Youtube IPA RSS", "Hedding, David \u2013 AASP Sobre la AASP Newsletter Contacto Buscar: Buscar Ir al contenido Inicio ORGANIZACI\u00d3N Constituci\u00f3n Informaci\u00f3n para socios CUOTA SOCIETARIA MIEMBROS A-B Ahumada, Ana L\u00eda Alonso, Victoria Anetas, Gilen Arenson, Lukas Az\u00f3car Sandoval, Guillermo Bodin, Xavier Bornet, Damien Borzotta, Enrique Bottegal, Estefan\u00eda Laura Bl\u00f6the, Jan Brenning, Alexander C-D E-G Falaschi, Daniel Fern\u00e1ndez Navarro, Hans Forte, Ana Paula Gallardo, Nahuel Gillespie, Alan Goyanes, Gabriel H-M Halla, Christian Hedding, David Hernandez, Jos\u00e9 Hiruma, Silvio Iba\u00f1ez Palacios, Gloria Patricia Kinnard, Christophe Koury, Peter Martini, Mateo Mendoza, Mart\u00edn Monnier, S\u00e9bastien N-P Pastore, Silvio Pecker Marcosig, Ivanna Perucca, Laura Patricia Q-S Ramires, Amalia Roig, Fidel Ruiz, Lucas Schittek, Karsten Schrott, Lothar Sileo, Noelia Sletten, Ronald T-Z Tapia Baldis, Carla Toledo, Mario Trombotto, Dar\u00edo Villalba, Ricardo Villarroel, Cristian Vivero, Sebasti\u00e1n Wainstein, Pablo Wingenroth, M\u00f3nica Cristina NOVEDADES Reuniones CURSOS Multimedia Art\u00edculos \u00bfQu\u00e9 es la Geocriolog\u00eda? \u00bfQu\u00e9 es el Ambiente Periglacial? \u00bfQu\u00e9 es el Permafrost? Ordenamiento Territorial y el ambiente criosf\u00e9rico Modelo Num\u00e9rico de Distribuci\u00f3n de Permafrost de Monta\u00f1a Hidrolog\u00eda Periglacial Paleopermafrost Publicaciones 1983 \u2013 Acta Geocriog\u00e9nica I 1984 \u2013 Acta Geocriog\u00e9nica II 1985 \u2013 Acta Geocriog\u00e9nica III 1986 \u2013 Acta Geocriog\u00e9nica IV 1989 \u2013 Acta Geocriog\u00e9nica V 2002 a 2010 2012 2013 2014 2015 a 2016 Publicaciones Especiales Galer\u00eda de im\u00e1genes Galer\u00eda de Videos Pol\u00edtica de privacidad Inicio Qui\u00e9nes somos Hedding, David Hedding, David David William Hedding I am a geomorphologist who focuses on understanding landforms and landscape processes in periglacial environments, primarily in the sub-Antarctic and Antarctic. My research has also incorporated studies on weathering processes (rock decay) and I am in the process of setting up a weathering simulation laboratory at the University of South Africa Science Campus, Florida, in which I hope to conduct research on predominantly mechanical weathering processes. On sub-Antarctic Marion Island, I have recently started to investigate aeolian (wind-driven) processes and landforms. I am also investigating the use of terrestrial cosmogenic nuclide dating of glacially-eroded surfaces and glacial deposits and seafloor mapping to develop a geochronology of the glaciation of sub-Antarctic Marion Island since the Last Glacial Maximum. On Round Island, near Mauritius in the Indian Ocean, I am part of a team of researchers who are investigating the interplay between rainfall erosivity and the erodibility of soils and rock on the island. Finally, I have obtained a C2 rating from the South African National Research Foundation and am Associate Professor in the Department of Geography at the University of South Africa in which I teach undergraduate modules on physical geography, environmental science and environmental awareness and responsibility. Contacto heddidw@unisa.ac.za Publicaciones 1- Hedding, D., 2016. Pronival Ramparts: Origin and development of terminology. Erkunde, vol. 70 (2): 141-151. Summary: Pronival ramparts are debris ridges formed at the downslope margins of perennial or semi-permanent snowbeds at the foot of bedrock cliffs. The close spatial proximity and morphological similarities of pronival ramparts to modified talus sheets and cones as well as protalus rock glaciers, moraines and landslides has led to difficulties in correctly identifying ramparts. Nevertheless, these landforms have been documented across the globe and, as a result, terms have been developed in different languages. However, the use and meaning of rampart terminology, particularly across several languages, are not consistent. This paper chronicles the origin of the term \u2018pronival rampart\u2019 and assesses its use in English language literature and exposes readers to terms from other languages and how their use may differ. Lastly, this paper highlights that, since the meaning of terms denoting pronival ramparts varies between languages, readers should be cognisant of the meaning of the term in a respective language as this may have implications for how pronival ramparts are identified in the context of talus-derived landforms. The paper also discusses whether ramparts are part of a non-developmental or developmental morphological continuum of talus-derived landforms. 2- Rudolph, E.M.; Meiklejohn, K.I., Hansen, C.D.; Hedding, D.W. and Nel, W., 2018. Rock glaciers in the Jutulsessen, Dronning Maud Land, East Antarctica. Polish Polar Research, vol. 39 (1): 1-17. DESCARGAR Comentarios cerrados. Buscar: Buscar Recursos\u00bfQu\u00e9 es la geocriolog\u00eda? \u00bfQu\u00e9 es el ambiente periglacial? \u00bfQu\u00e9 es permafrost? Ordenamiento Territorial y el ambiente criosf\u00e9rico Modelo N\u00famerico de Distribuci\u00f3n de Permafrost de Monta\u00f1a Sitios de Inter\u00e9s International Permafrost Association (IPA) Arctic Portal National Snow and Data Center Climate and Cryosphere Sudam\u00e9rica Inventario Nacional de Glaciares (Argentina) Mapa de la Probabilidad de Permafrost para los Andes Semiaridos Chilenos Glaciares de Argentina CON\u00d3CENOS 1 NOTICIAS 1 ARCHIVO MULTIMEDIA 1 CONTACTO NEWSLETTER 1 2 AASP - Asociaci\u00f3n Argentina y Sudamericana de Permafrost. Todos los derechos reservados, Noviembre de 2011. Adapted by Fuxia Estudio Creado con Nirvana & WordPress.", "Permafrost - Wikipedia Permafrost From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article is about frozen ground. For other uses, see Permafrost (disambiguation). PermafrostMap showing extent and types of permafrost in the Northern HemisphereUsed inInternational Permafrost AssociationClimateHigh latitudes, alpine regions Wikinews has related news: Scientists warn thawing Siberia may trigger global meltdown Slope failure of permafrost soil, revealing ice lenses. In geology, permafrost is ground,[1] including rock or (cryotic) soil, at or below the freezing point of water 0\u00a0\u00b0C (32\u00a0\u00b0F) for two or more years. Most permafrost is located in high latitudes (in and around the Arctic and Antarctic regions), but at lower latitudes alpine permafrost occurs at higher elevations. Ground ice is not always present, as may be in the case of non-porous bedrock, but it frequently occurs and it may be in amounts exceeding the potential hydraulic saturation of the ground material. Permafrost accounts for 0.022% of total water on Earth[2] and the permafrost region covers 24% of exposed land in the Northern Hemisphere.[3] It also occurs subsea on the continental shelves of the continents surrounding the Arctic Ocean, portions of which were exposed during the last glacial period.[4] The thawing of permafrost has implications for the global climate.[5] A global temperature rise of 1.5\u00a0\u00b0C (2.7\u00a0\u00b0F) above current levels would be enough to start the thawing of permafrost in Siberia, according to one group of scientists.[6][7] Contents 1 History 2 Extent 2.1 Continuity of coverage 2.1.1 Discontinuous permafrost 2.1.2 Continuous permafrost 2.2 Alpine permafrost 2.3 Subsea permafrost 3 Manifestations 3.1 Base depth 3.2 Massive ground ice 3.3 Landforms 3.4 Carbon cycle in permafrost 4 Climate change effects 4.1 Historical changes 4.2 Thaw 4.3 Effect on slope stability 4.4 Ecological consequences 4.5 Predicted rate of change in the Arctic 5 Other issues 5.1 Construction on permafrost 5.2 Revival of organisms preserved in permafrost 6 See also 7 References 8 External links History[edit] \"In contrast to the relative dearth of reports on frozen ground in north America prior to World War II, a vast literature on the engineering aspects of permafrost was available in Russian. Beginning in 1942, Siemon William Muller delved into the relevant Russian literature held by the Library of Congress and the U.S. Geological Survey Library so that he was able to furnish the government an engineering field guide and a technical report about permafrost by 1943\",[8] year in which he coined the term as a contraction of permamently frozen ground.[9] Although originally classified (as U.S. Army. Office of the Chief of Engineers, Strategic Engineering Study, no. 62, 1943),[10][11][12][9] in 1947 a revised report was released publicly, which is regarded as the first North American treatise on the subject.[12][8] Extent[edit] Red lines: Seasonal temperature extremes (dotted=average). Permafrost is soil, rock or sediment that is frozen for more than two consecutive years. In areas not overlain by ice, it exists beneath a layer of soil, rock or sediment, which freezes and thaws annually and is called the \"active layer\".[13] In practice, this means that permafrost occurs at an mean annual temperature of \u22122\u00a0\u00b0C (28.4\u00a0\u00b0F) or colder. Active layer thickness varies with the season, but is 0.3 to 4 meters thick (shallow along the Arctic coast; deep in southern Siberia and the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau). The extent of permafrost varies with the climate: in the Northern Hemisphere today, 24% of the ice-free land area, equivalent to 19 million square kilometers,[14] is more or less influenced by permafrost. Of this area slightly more than half is underlain by continuous permafrost, around 20 percent by discontinuous permafrost, and a little less than 30 percent by sporadic permafrost.[15] Most of this area is found in Siberia, northern Canada, Alaska and Greenland. Beneath the active layer annual temperature swings of permafrost become smaller with depth. The deepest depth of permafrost occurs where geothermal heat maintains a temperature above freezing. Above that bottom limit there may be permafrost, whose temperature doesn't change annually\u2014\"isothermal permafrost\".[16] Continuity of coverage[edit] Permafrost typically forms in any climate where the mean annual air temperature is less than the freezing point of water. Exceptions are found in moist-wintered forest climates, such as in Northern Scandinavia and the North-Eastern part of European Russia west of the Urals, where snow acts as an insulating blanket. Glaciated areas may be exceptions. Since all glaciers are warmed at their base by geothermal heat, temperate glaciers, which are near the pressure-melting point throughout, may have liquid water at the interface with the ground and are therefore free of underlying permafrost.[17] \"Fossil\" cold anomalies in the Geothermal gradient in areas where deep permafrost developed during the Pleistocene persist down to several hundred metres. This is evident from temperature measurements in boreholes in North America and Europe.[18] Discontinuous permafrost[edit] Typically, the below-ground temperature varies less from season to season than the air temperature, with mean annual temperatures tending to increase with depth as a result of the geothermal crustal gradient. Thus, if the mean annual air temperature is only slightly below 0\u00a0\u00b0C (32\u00a0\u00b0F), permafrost will form only in spots that are sheltered\u2014usually with a northerly aspect\u2014creating discontinuous permafrost. Usually, permafrost will remain discontinuous in a climate where the mean annual soil surface temperature is between \u22125 and 0\u00a0\u00b0C (23 and 32\u00a0\u00b0F). In the moist-wintered areas mentioned before, there may not be even discontinuous permafrost down to \u22122\u00a0\u00b0C (28\u00a0\u00b0F). Discontinuous permafrost is often further divided into extensive discontinuous permafrost, where permafrost covers between 50 and 90 percent of the landscape and is usually found in areas with mean annual temperatures between \u22122 and \u22124\u00a0\u00b0C (28 and 25\u00a0\u00b0F), and sporadic permafrost, where permafrost cover is less than 50 percent of the landscape and typically occurs at mean annual temperatures between 0 and \u22122\u00a0\u00b0C (32 and 28\u00a0\u00b0F).[19] In soil science, the sporadic permafrost zone is abbreviated SPZ and the extensive discontinuous permafrost zone DPZ.[20] Exceptions occur in un-glaciated Siberia and Alaska where the present depth of permafrost is a relic of climatic conditions during glacial ages where winters were up to 11\u00a0\u00b0C (20\u00a0\u00b0F) colder than those of today. Continuous permafrost[edit] Estimated extent of alpine permafrost by region[21] Locality Area(\u00d71,000) Qinghai-Tibet Plateau 1,300\u00a0km2 (500\u00a0sq\u00a0mi) Khangai-Altai Mountains 1,000\u00a0km2 (390\u00a0sq\u00a0mi) Brooks Range 263\u00a0km2 (102\u00a0sq\u00a0mi) Siberian Mountains 255\u00a0km2 (98\u00a0sq\u00a0mi) Greenland 251\u00a0km2 (97\u00a0sq\u00a0mi) Ural Mountains 125\u00a0km2 (48\u00a0sq\u00a0mi) Andes 100\u00a0km2 (39\u00a0sq\u00a0mi) Rocky Mountains (US and Canada) 100\u00a0km2 (39\u00a0sq\u00a0mi) Fennoscandian mountains 75\u00a0km2 (29\u00a0sq\u00a0mi) Remaining <100\u00a0km2 (39\u00a0sq\u00a0mi) At mean annual soil surface temperatures below \u22125\u00a0\u00b0C (23\u00a0\u00b0F) the influence of aspect can never be sufficient to thaw permafrost and a zone of continuous permafrost (abbreviated to CPZ) forms. A line of continuous permafrost in the Northern Hemisphere[22] represents the most southerly border where land is covered by continuous permafrost or glacial ice. The line of continuous permafrost varies around the world northward or southward due to regional climatic changes. In the southern hemisphere, most of the equivalent line would fall within the Southern Ocean if there were land there. Most of the Antarctic continent is overlain by glaciers, under which much of the terrain is subject to basal melting.[23] The exposed land of Antarctica is substantially underlain with permafrost,[24] some of which is subject to warming and thawing along the coastline.[25] Alpine permafrost[edit] Estimates of the total area of alpine permafrost vary. Bockheim and Munroe[21] combined three sources and made the tabulated estimates by region, totaling 3,560,000\u00a0km2 (1,370,000\u00a0sq\u00a0mi). Alpine permafrost in the Andes has not been mapped.[26] Its extent has been modeled to assess the amount of water bound up in these areas.[27] In 2009, a researcher from Alaska found permafrost at the 4,700\u00a0m (15,400\u00a0ft) level on Africa's highest peak, Mount Kilimanjaro, approximately 3\u00b0 north of the equator.[28] Subsea permafrost[edit] Subsea permafrost occurs beneath the seabed and exists in the continental shelves of the polar regions.[4] These areas formed during the last ice age, when a larger portion of Earth's water was bound up in ice sheets on land and when sea levels were low. As the ice sheets melted to again become seawater, the permafrost became submerged shelves under relatively warm and salty boundary conditions, compared to surface permafrost. Therefore, subsea permafrost exists in conditions that lead to its diminishment. According to Osterkamp, subsea permafrost is a factor in the \"design, construction, and operation of coastal facilities, structures founded on the seabed, artificial islands, sub-sea pipelines, and wells drilled for exploration and production.\"[1] It also contains gas hydrates in places, which are both a \"potential abundant source of energy\", but also may destabilize, as subsea permafrost warms and thaws, producing large amounts of methane gas, which is a potent green-house gas.[1][29] Manifestations[edit] Time required for permafrost to reach depth at Prudhoe Bay, Alaska[30] Time (yr) Permafrost depth 1 4.44\u00a0m (14.6\u00a0ft) 350 79.9\u00a0m (262\u00a0ft) 3,500 219.3\u00a0m (719\u00a0ft) 35,000 461.4\u00a0m (1,514\u00a0ft) 100,000 567.8\u00a0m (1,863\u00a0ft) 225,000 626.5\u00a0m (2,055\u00a0ft) 775,000 687.7\u00a0m (2,256\u00a0ft) Base depth[edit] Permafrost extends to a base depth where geothermal heat from the Earth and the mean annual temperature at the surface achieve an equilibrium temperature of 0\u00a0\u00b0C.[31] The base depth of permafrost reaches 1,493\u00a0m (4,898\u00a0ft) in the northern Lena and Yana River basins in Siberia.[32] The geothermal gradient is the rate of increasing temperature with respect to increasing depth in the Earth's interior. Away from tectonic plate boundaries, it is about 25\u201330\u00a0\u00b0C/km (72\u201387\u00a0\u00b0F/mi) near the surface in most of the world.[33] It varies with the thermal conductivity of geologic material and is less for permafrost in soil than in bedrock.[31] Calculations indicate that the time required to form the deep permafrost underlying Prudhoe Bay, Alaska was over a half-million years.[30][34] This extended over several glacial and interglacial cycles of the Pleistocene and suggests that the present climate of Prudhoe Bay is probably considerably warmer than it has been on average over that period. Such warming over the past 15,000 years is widely accepted.[30] The table to the right shows that the first hundred metres of permafrost forms relatively quickly but that deeper levels take progressively longer. Massive ground ice[edit] Massive blue ground ice exposure on the north shore of Herschel Island, Yukon, Canada. When the ice content of a permafrost exceeds 250 percent (ice to dry soil by mass) it is classified as massive ice. Massive ice bodies can range in composition, in every conceivable gradation from icy mud to pure ice. Massive icy beds have a minimum thickness of at least 2 m and a short diameter of at least 10 m.[35] First recorded North American observations were by European scientists at Canning River, Alaska in 1919.[36] Russian literature provides an earlier date of 1735 and 1739 during the Great North Expedition by P. Lassinius and Kh. P. Laptev, respectively.[37] Two categories of massive ground ice are buried surface ice and intrasedimental ice[38] (also called constitutional ice).[37] Buried surface ice may derive from snow, frozen lake or sea ice, aufeis (stranded river ice) and\u2014probably the most prevalent\u2014buried glacial ice.[39] Intrasedimental ice forms by in-place freezing of subterranean waters and is dominated by segregational ice which results from the crystallizational differentiation taking place during the freezing of wet sediments, accompanied by water migrating to the freezing front.[37] Intrasedimental or constitutional ice has been widely observed and studied across Canada and also includes intrusive and injection ice.[36][37] Additionally, ice wedges\u2014a separate type of ground ice\u2014produce recognizable patterned ground or tundra polygons. Ice wedges form in a pre-existing geological substrate and were first described in 1919.[36][37] Several types of massive ground ice, including ice wedges and intrasedimental ice within the cliff wall of a retrogressive thaw slump located on the southern coast of Herschel Island within an approximately 22-metre (72\u00a0ft) by 1,300-metre (4,300\u00a0ft) headwall. Landforms[edit] Permafrost processes manifest themselves in large-scale land forms, such as palsas and pingos[40] and smaller-scale phenomena, such as patterned ground found in arctic, periglacial and alpine areas.[41] A group of palsas, as seen from above, formed by the growth of ice lenses. Pingos near Tuktoyaktuk, Northwest Territories, Canada Ground polygons Stone rings on Spitsbergen Ice wedges seen from top Solifluction on Svalbard Contraction crack (ice wedge) polygons on Arctic sediment. Cracks forming at the edges of the Storflaket permafrost bog in Sweden. Carbon cycle in permafrost[edit] The permafrost carbon cycle (Arctic Carbon Cycle) deals with the transfer of carbon from permafrost soils to terrestrial vegetation and microbes, to the atmosphere, back to vegetation, and finally back to permafrost soils through burial and sedimentation due to cryogenic processes. Some of this carbon is transferred to the ocean and other portions of the globe through the global carbon cycle. The cycle includes the exchange of carbon dioxide and methane between terrestrial components and the atmosphere, as well as the transfer of carbon between land and water as methane, dissolved organic carbon, dissolved inorganic carbon, particulate inorganic carbon and particulate organic carbon.[42] Climate change effects[edit] Arctic permafrost has been diminishing for many centuries. The consequence is thawing soil, which may be weaker, and release of methane, which contributes to an increased rate of global warming as part of a feedback loop. Historical changes[edit] Recently thawed Arctic permafrost and coastal erosion on the Beaufort Sea, Arctic Ocean, near Point Lonely, Alaska in 2013. At the Last Glacial Maximum, continuous permafrost covered a much greater area than it does today, covering all of ice-free Europe south to about Szeged (southeastern Hungary) and the Sea of Azov (then dry land)[43] and East Asia south to present-day Changchun and Abashiri.[44] In North America, only an extremely narrow belt of permafrost existed south of the ice sheet at about the latitude of New Jersey through southern Iowa and northern Missouri, but permafrost was more extensive in the drier western regions where it extended to the southern border of Idaho and Oregon.[45] In the southern hemisphere, there is some evidence for former permafrost from this period in central Otago and Argentine Patagonia, but was probably discontinuous, and is related to the tundra. Alpine permafrost also occurred in the Drakensberg during glacial maxima above about 3,000 metres (9,840\u00a0ft).[46][47] Thaw[edit] See also: Thermokarst Permafrost thaw ponds on peatland in Hudson Bay, Canada in 2008.[48] The ground can consist of many substrate materials, including bedrock, sediment, organic matter, water or ice. Frozen ground is that which is below the freezing point of water, whether or not water is present in the substrate. Ground ice is not always present, as may be the case with nonporous bedrock, but it frequently occurs and may be present in amounts exceeding the potential hydraulic saturation of the thawed substrate. By definition, permafrost is ground that remains frozen for two or more years. Since frozen soil, including permafrost, comprises a large percentage of substrate materials other than ice, it thaws rather than melts even as any ice content melts.[49] An analogy is when a freezer door is left open, although the ice in the freezer may change phase to a liquid, the food solids will not experience a phase change. In aggregate, the food thaws but does not melt. Melting implies the phase change of all solids to liquid. One visible sign of permafrost degradation is the random displacement of trees from their vertical orientation in permafrost areas.[50][51] As a consequence, precipitation has increased which in turn results in the weakening and eventual collapse of buildings in areas such as Norilsk in northern Russia, which lies upon the permafrost.[52] Effect on slope stability[edit] Over the past century, an increasing number of alpine rock slope failure events in mountain ranges around the world have been recorded. It is expected that the high number of structural failures is due to permafrost thawing, which is thought to be linked to climate change. Permafrost thawing is thought to have contributed to the 1987 Val Pola landslide that killed 22 people in the Italian Alps.[53] In mountain ranges, much of the structural stability can be attributed to glaciers and permafrost. As climate warms, permafrost thaws, which results in a less stable mountain structure, and ultimately more slope failures.[54] Increasing temperatures allow deeper active layer depths, resulting in increased water infiltration. Ice within the soil melts, causing loss of soil strength, accelerated movement, and potential debris flows.[55] McSaveney[56] reported massive rock and ice falls (up to 11.8 million m3), earthquakes (up to 3.9 Richter), floods (up to 7.8 million m3 water), and rapid rock-ice flow to long distances (up to 7.5\u00a0km at 60\u00a0m/s) caused by \u201cinstability of slopes\u201d in high mountain permafrost. Instability of slopes in permafrost at elevated temperatures near freezing point in warming permafrost is related to effective stress and buildup of pore-water pressure in these soils.[57] Kia and his co-inventors[58] invented a new filter-less rigid piezometer (FRP) for measuring pore-water pressure in partially frozen soils such as warming permafrost soils. They extended the use of effective stress concept to partially frozen soils for use in slope stability analysis of warming permafrost slopes. The use of effective stress concept has many advantages such as ability to extend the concepts of \"Critical State Soil Mechanics\" into frozen ground engineering. Ecological consequences[edit] In the northern circumpolar region, permafrost contains 1700 billion tons of organic material equaling almost half of all organic material in all soils.[14] This pool was built up over thousands of years and is only slowly degraded under the cold conditions in the Arctic. The amount of carbon sequestered in permafrost is four times the carbon that has been released to the atmosphere due to human activities in modern time.[59] One manifestation of this is yedoma, which is an organic-rich (about 2% carbon by mass) Pleistocene-age loess permafrost with ice content of 50\u201390% by volume.[60] Formation of permafrost has significant consequences for ecological systems, primarily due to constraints imposed upon rooting zones, but also due to limitations on den and burrow geometries for fauna requiring subsurface homes. Secondary effects impact species dependent on plants and animals whose habitat is constrained by the permafrost. One of the most widespread examples is the dominance of Black Spruce in extensive permafrost areas, since this species can tolerate rooting pattern constrained to the near surface.[61] One gram of soil from the active layer may include more than one billion bacteria cells. If placed along each other, bacteria from one kilogram of active layer soil will form a 1000\u00a0km long chain. The number of bacteria in permafrost soil varies widely, typically from 1 to 1000 million per gram of soil.[62] Most of these bacteria and fungi in permafrost soil can not be cultured in the laboratory, but the identity of the microorganisms can be revealed by DNA-based techniques. The Arctic region is one of the many natural sources of the greenhouse gas methane.[63] Global warming accelerates its release, due to both release of methane from existing stores, and from methanogenesis in rotting biomass.[64] Large quantities of methane are stored in the Arctic in natural gas deposits, permafrost, and as submarine clathrates. Permafrost and clathrates degrade on warming, thus large releases of methane from these sources may arise as a result of global warming.[65][66][67] Other sources of methane include submarine taliks, river transport, ice complex retreat, submarine permafrost and decaying gas hydrate deposits.[68] Preliminary computer analyses suggest that permafrost could produce carbon equal to 15 percent or so of today\u2019s emissions from human activities.[69] A hypothesis forwarded by Sergey Zimov is that the reduction of herds of large herbivores has increased the ratio of energy emission and energy absorption tundra (energy balance) in a manner that increases the tendency for net thawing of permafrost.[70] He is testing this hypothesis in an experiment at Pleistocene Park, a nature reserve in northeastern Siberia.[71] Predicted rate of change in the Arctic[edit] See also: Arctic methane release According to IPCC Fifth Assessment Report there is high confidence that permafrost temperatures have increased in most regions since the early 1980s. Observed warming was up to 3\u00a0\u00b0C in parts of Northern Alaska (early 1980s to mid-2000s) and up to 2\u00a0\u00b0C in parts of the Russian European North (1971\u20132010).[72] In Yukon, the zone of continuous permafrost might have moved 100 kilometres (62\u00a0mi) poleward since 1899, but accurate records only go back 30 years. It is thought that permafrost thawing could exacerbate global warming by releasing methane and other hydrocarbons, which are powerful greenhouse gases.[73][74][75] It also could encourage erosion because permafrost lends stability to barren Arctic slopes. Arctic temperatures are expected to increase at roughly twice the global rate.[76] The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) will in their fifth report establish scenarios for the future, where the temperature in the Arctic will rise between 1.5 and 2.5\u00a0\u00b0C by 2040 and with 2 to 7.5\u00a0\u00b0C by 2100. Estimates vary on how many tons of greenhouse gases are emitted from thawed permafrost soils. One estimate suggests that 110\u2013231 billion tons of CO2 equivalents (about half from carbon dioxide and the other half from methane) will be emitted by 2040, and 850\u20131400 billion tons by 2100.[59] This corresponds to an average annual emission rate of 4\u20138 billion tons of CO2 equivalents in the period 2011\u20132040 and annually 10\u201316 billion tons of CO2 equivalents in the period 2011\u20132100 as a result of thawing permafrost. For comparison, the anthropogenic emission of all greenhouse gases in 2010 is approximately 48 billion tons of CO2 equivalents.[77] Release of greenhouse gases from thawed permafrost to the atmosphere may increase global warming. Other issues[edit] The International Permafrost Association (IPA) is an integrator of issues regarding permafrost. It convenes International Permafrost Conferences, undertakes special projects such as preparing databases, maps, bibliographies, and glossaries, and coordinates international field programmes and networks. Among other issues addressed by the IPA are: Problems for construction on permafrost owing to the change of soil properties of the ground on which structures are placed and the biological processes in permafrost, e.g. the preservation of organisms frozen in situ. Construction on permafrost[edit] Building on permafrost is difficult because the heat of the building (or pipeline) can thaw the permafrost and destabilize the structure. Three common solutions include: using foundations on wood piles; building on a thick gravel pad (usually 1\u20132 metres/3.3\u20136.6 feet thick); or using anhydrous ammonia heat pipes.[78] The Trans-Alaska Pipeline System uses heat pipes built into vertical supports to prevent the pipeline from sinking and the Qingzang railway in Tibet employs a variety of methods to keep the ground cool, both in areas with frost-susceptible soil. Permafrost may necessitate special enclosures for buried utilities, called \"utilidors\". The Permafrost Research Institute in Yakutsk, found that the sinking of large buildings into the ground can be prevented by using pile foundations extending down to 15 metres (49\u00a0ft) or more. At this depth the temperature does not change with the seasons, remaining at about \u22125\u00a0\u00b0C (23\u00a0\u00b0F). Modern buildings in permafrost zones may be built on piles to avoid permafrost-thaw foundation failure from the heat of the building. Heat pipes in vertical supports maintain a frozen bulb around portions of the Trans-Alaska Pipeline that are at risk of thawing. Pile foundations in Yakutsk, a city underlain with continuous permafrost. District heating pipes run above ground in Yakutsk to avoid thawing permafrost. Revival of organisms preserved in permafrost[edit] In 2012, Russian researchers proved that permafrost can serve as a natural repository for ancient life forms by reviving of Silene stenophylla from 30,000 year old tissue found in an Ice Age squirrel burrow in the Siberian permafrost. This is the oldest plant tissue ever revived. The plant was fertile, producing white flowers and viable seeds. The study demonstrated that tissue can survive ice preservation for tens of thousands of years.[79] A 2016 outbreak of anthrax in the Yamal Peninsula is believed to be due to thawing permafrost.[80] See also[edit] Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost References[edit] ^ a b c Osterkamp, T. E. (2001), \"Sub-Sea Permafrost\", Academic Press: 2902\u201312 ^ Shiklomanov, Igor (1993), \"World fresh water resources\", in Gleick, Peter H., Water in Crisis: A Guide to the World's Fresh Water Resources, New York: Oxford University Press, archived from the original on 2014-03-10, retrieved 2014-03-02 ^ \"Frozen ground includes seasonally frozen ground and permafrost. The permafrost region occupies approximately 23 \u00d7 106 km2 or 24% of the land area in the NH [Northern Hemisphere].\" from Lemke et al, \"Observations: Changes in Snow, Ice and Frozen Ground\", IPCC WGI IV AR, 2007, pages 242-243. ^ a b Editors (2014). \"What is Permafrost?\". International Permafrost Association. Archived from the original on 2014-11-08. Retrieved 2014-11-08. ^ Margaret Kriz Hobson (December 1, 2016). \"Melting Permafrost Could Affect Weather Worldwide; It's not just releasing greenhouse gases\u2014it may also alter the ocean's chemistry and circulation patterns\". scientificamerican.com. Scientific American. Archived from the original on 2016-12-02. Retrieved December 2, 2016 \u2013 via ClimateWire. ^ Harvey, Fiona (21 February 2013). \"1.5C rise in temperature enough to start permafrost melt, scientists warn\". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 23 February 2013. Retrieved 23 February 2013. ^ Schuur, Ted (2016). \"Thawing Permafrost Would Accelerate Global Warming. Thawing Arctic tundra will likely speed up climate change for a century or more. The question is: How drastically?\". Scientific American. 315 (December 2016): 56\u201361. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican1216-56. PMID\u00a028004690. Archived from the original on 2016-12-02. Retrieved December 2, 2016. ^ a b Walker, H. Jesse (December 2010). \"Frozen in Time. Permafrost and Engineering Problems Review\". Arctic. 63 (4): 477. ^ a b Ray, Luis L. \"Permafrost - USGS [=United States Geological Survey] Library Publications Warehouse\" (PDF). Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-05-02. Retrieved November 19, 2018. ^ U.S. Geological Survey; United States. Army. Corps of Engineers. Strategic Intelligence Branch (1943). \"Permafrost or permanently frozen ground and related engineering problems\". Strategic Engineering Study (62): 231. OCLC\u00a022879846. ^ Occurrences on Google Books. ^ a b Muller, Siemon William (1947). Permafrost. Or, Permanently Frozen Ground and Related Engineering Problems. Ann Arbor, Michigan: Edwards. OCLC\u00a01646047. ^ Staff (2014). \"What is Permafrost?\". International Permafrost Association. Archived from the original on 2014-11-08. Retrieved 2014-02-28. ^ a b Tarnocai; et al. (2009). \"Soil organic carbon pools in the northern circumpolar permafrost region\". Global Biogeochemical Cycles. 23 (2): GB2023. Bibcode:2009GBioC..23.2023T. doi:10.1029/2008gb003327. ^ Heginbottom, J. Alan, Brown, Jerry; Humlum, Ole and Svensson, Harald; \u2018State of the Earth\u2019s Cryosphere at the Beginning of the 21st Century: Glaciers, Global Snow Cover, Floating Ice, and Permafrost and Periglacial Environments\u2019, p. A435 ^ Delisle, G. (2007). \"Near-surface permafrost degradation: How severe during the 21st century?\". Geophysical Research Letters. 34 (L09503): 4. Bibcode:2007GeoRL..34.9503D. doi:10.1029/2007GL029323. ^ Sharp, Robert Phillip (1988). Living Ice: Understanding Glaciers and Glaciation. Cambridge University Press. p.\u00a027. ISBN\u00a0978-0-521-33009-1. ^ Majorowicz, Jacek (2012), \"Permafrost at the ice base of recent pleistocene glaciations \u2013 Inferences from borehole temperatures profiles\", Bulletin of Geography. Physical Geography Series, Physical Geography Series, 5: 7\u201328, doi:10.2478/v10250-012-0001-x ^ Brown, Roger J.E.; P\u00e9w\u00e9, Troy L. (1973), \"Distribution of permafrost in North America and its relationship to the environment: A review, 1963\u20131973\", Permafrost: North American Contribution \u2013 Second International Conference, 2: 71\u2013100 ^ Robinson, S.D.; et al. (2003), \"Permafrost and peatland carbon sink capacity with increasing latitude\", in Phillips; et al., Permafrost (PDF), Swets & Zeitlinger, pp.\u00a0965\u2013970, ISBN\u00a090 5809 582 7, archived (PDF) from the original on 2014-03-02, retrieved 2014-03-02 ^ a b Bockheim, James G.; Munroe, Jeffrey S. (2014), \"Organic carbon pools and genesis of alpine soils with permafrost: a review\" (PDF), Arctic, Antarctic, and Alpine Research, 46 (4): 987\u20131006, doi:10.1657/1938-4246-46.4.987, archived (PDF) from the original on 2016-09-23, retrieved 2016-04-25 ^ Andersland, Orlando B.; Ladanyi, Branko (2004). Frozen ground engineering (2nd ed.). Wiley. p.\u00a05. ISBN\u00a0978-0-471-61549-1. ^ Zoltikov, I.A. (1962), \"Heat regime of the central Antarctic glacier\", Antarctica, Reports of the Commission, 1961 (in Russian): 27\u201340 ^ Campbell, Iain B.; Claridge, Graeme G. C. (2009), \"Antarctic Permafrost Soils\", in Margesin, Rosa, Permafrost Soils, Soil Biology, 16, Berlin: Springer, pp.\u00a017\u201331, doi:10.1007/978-3-540-69371-0_2, ISBN\u00a0978-3-540-69370-3 ^ Heinrich, Holly (July 25, 2013), \"Permafrost Melting Faster Than Expected in Antarctica\", National Public Radio, archived from the original on 2016-05-03, retrieved 2016-04-23 ^ Azocar, Guillermo (2014), Modeling of Permafrost Distribution in the Semi-arid Chilean Andes, Waterloo, Ontario: University of Waterloo, archived from the original on 2016-05-30, retrieved 2016-04-24 ^ Ruiz, Lucas; Liaudat, Dario Trombotto (2012), Mountain Permafrost Distribution in the Andes of Chubut (Argentina) Based on a Statistical Model (PDF), Tenth International Conference on Permafrost, Mendoza, Argentina: Instituto Argentino de Nivolog\u00eda Glaciolog\u00eda y Ciencias Ambientales, pp.\u00a0365\u2013370, archived (PDF) from the original on 2016-05-13, retrieved 2016-04-24 ^ Rozell, Ned (November 18, 2009), \"Permafrost near equator; hummingbirds near subarctic\", Capitol City Weekly, Juneau, Alaska ^ IPCC AR4 (2007). \"Climate Change 2007: Working Group I: The Physical Science Basis\". Retrieved April 12, 2014.CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link) ^ a b c Lunardini 1995, p.\u00a035 Table Dl. Freeze at Prudhoe Bay, Alaska. ^ a b Osterkamp, T.E.; Burn, C.R. (2014-09-14), \"Permafrost\", in North, Gerald R.; Pyle, John A.; Zhang, Fuqing, Encyclopedia of Atmospheric Sciences (PDF), 4, Elsevier, pp.\u00a01717\u20131729, ISBN\u00a0978-0123822260, archived (PDF) from the original on 2016-11-30, retrieved 2016-03-08 ^ Desonie, Dana (2008). Polar Regions: Human Impacts. New York: Chelsea Press. ISBN\u00a0978-0-8160-6218-8. ^ Fridleifsson, Ingvar B.; Bertani, Ruggero; Huenges, Ernst; Lund, John W.; Ragnarsson, Arni; Rybach, Ladislaus (2008-02-11). O. Hohmeyer and T. Trittin, ed. \"The possible role and contribution of geothermal energy to the mitigation of climate change\" (PDF). Luebeck, Germany: 59\u201380. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2013-03-12. Retrieved 2013-11-03. ^ Lunardini, Virgil J. (April 1995). \"Permafrost Formation Time\" (PDF). CRREL Report 95-8. Hanover NH: US Army Corps of Engineers Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory. p.\u00a018. ADA295515. Archived from the original on 2013-04-08. Retrieved 2012-03-03. ^ Mackay, J. Ross (1973), \"Problems in the origins of massive icy beds, Western Arctic, Canada\", Permafrost: North American Contribution \u2013 Second International Conference, 2: 223\u20138 ^ a b c French, H.M. (2007). The Periglacial Environment (3 ed.). Chichester: Wiley. ^ a b c d e Shumskiy, P.A.; Vtyurin, B.I. (1963), \"Underground ice\", Permafrost International Conference (1287): 108\u201313 ^ Mackay, J.R.; Dallimore, S.R. (1992), \"Massive ice of Tuktoyaktuk area, Western Arctic coast, Canada\", Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences, 29 (6): 1234\u201342, Bibcode:1992CaJES..29.1235M, doi:10.1139/e92-099 ^ Astakhov, 1986; Kaplanskaya and Tarnogradskiy, 1986; Astakhov and Isayeva, 1988; French, 1990; Lacelle et al., 2009 ^ Pidwirny, M (2006). \"Periglacial Processes and Landforms\". Fundamentals of Physical Geography. ^ Kessler MA, Werner BT (January 2003). \"Self-organization of sorted patterned ground\". Science. 299 (5605): 380\u20133. Bibcode:2003Sci...299..380K. doi:10.1126/science.1077309. PMID\u00a012532013. ^ McGuire, A.D., Anderson, L.G., Christensen, T.R., Dallimore, S., Guo, L., Hayes, D.J., Heimann, M., Lorenson, T.D., Macdonald, R.W., and Roulet, N. (2009). \"Sensitivity of the carbon cycle in the Arctic to climate change\". Ecological Monographs. 79 (4): 523\u2013555. doi:10.1890/08-2025.1. hdl:11858/00-001M-0000-000E-D87B-C.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Sidorchuk, Aleksey, Borisova Olga and Panin; Andrey; \u201cFluvial response to the late Valdai/Holocene environmental change on the East European plain\u201d Archived 2013-12-26 at the Wayback Machine ^ Yugo Ono and Tomohisa Irino; \u201cSouthern migration of westerlies in the Northern Hemisphere PEP II transect during the Last Glacial Maximum\u201d in Quaternary International 118\u2013119 (2004); pp. 13\u201322 ^ Malde, H.E.; \u201cPatterned Ground in the Western Snake River Plain, Idaho, and Its Possible Cold-Climate Origin\u201d; in Geological society of America Bulletin; v. 75 no. 3 (March 1964); pp. 191\u2013208 ^ Grab, Stefan; \u201cCharacteristics and palaeoenvironmental significance of relict sorted patterned ground, Drakensberg plateau, southern Africa\u201d in Quaternary Science Reviews, vol. 21, issues 14\u201315, (August 2002), pp. 1729\u20131744 ^ \"Inventory of fossil cryogenic forms and structures in Patagonia and the mountains of Argentina beyond the Andes\". South African Journal of Science, 98: 171\u2013180, Review Articles, Pretoria, Sud\u00e1frica. ^ Larry D. Dyke, Wendy E. Sladen (2010). \"Permafrost and Peatland Evolution in the Northern Hudson Bay Lowland, Manitoba\". ARCTIC. 63 (4). doi:10.14430/arctic3332. Archived from the original on 2014-08-10. Retrieved 2014-08-02.CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link) ^ Grosse, G.; Romanovsky, V.; Nelson, F.E.; Brown, J.; Lewkowicz, A.G. (March 2010). \"Why Permafrost Is Thawing, Not Melting\" (PDF). Eos, Transactions, American Geophysical Union. 91 (2): 87. Bibcode:2010EOSTr..91...87G. doi:10.1029/2010EO090003. Archived (PDF) from the original on 2011-08-15. Retrieved 2012-04-29. ^ Stevens, William K. (1998-08-18). \"Dead Trees and Shriveling Glaciers as Alaska Melts\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2007-12-26. Retrieved 2007-12-19. Here and there, roadside utility poles destabilized by the melting tilt at crazy angles. So do trees, creating a phenomenon known as drunken forest. ^ de Villiers, Marq (2001). Water: The Fate of Our Most Precious Resource. Boston: Mariner Books. ISBN\u00a0978-0-618-12744-3. \u2026caused what the locals call \"drunken forests,\" the trees tilting and leaning\u2026 ^ Luhn, Alec (2016-10-14). \"Slow-motion wrecks: how thawing permafrost is destroying Arctic cities\". The Guardian. ISSN\u00a00261-3077. Archived from the original on 2016-12-01. Retrieved 2016-12-01. ^ F., Dramis; M., Govi; M., Guglielmin; G., Mortara (1995-01-01). \"Mountain permafrost and slope instability in the Italian Alps: The Val Pola Landslide\". Permafrost and Periglacial Processes. 6 (1): 73\u201381. doi:10.1002/ppp.3430060108. ISSN\u00a01099-1530. ^ Huggel, C.; Allen, S.; Deline, P.; et al. (June 2012), \"Ice thawing, mountains falling; are alpine rock slope failures increasing?\", Geology Today, 28 (3): 98\u2013104, doi:10.1111/j.1365-2451.2012.00836.x ^ Darrow, M.; Gyswyt, N.; Simpson, J.; Daanen, R.; Hubbard, T.; et al. (May 2016), \"Frozen debris lobe morphology and movement: an overview of eight dynamic features, southern Brooks Range, Alaska\", The Cryosphere, 10 (3): 977\u2013993, Bibcode:2016TCry...10..977D, doi:10.5194/tc-10-977-2016, archived from the original on 2018-06-28, retrieved 2018-06-28 ^ McSaveney, M.J. (2002). Recent rockfalls and rock avalanches in Mount Cook national park, New Zealand. In Catastrophic landslides, effects, occurrence and mechanisms. Boulder: Geological Society of America, Reviews in Engineering Geology, Volume XV. pp.\u00a035\u201370. ISBN\u00a09780813758152. Archived from the original on 2018-01-28. Retrieved 2018-01-27. ^ Nater, P.; Arenson, L.U.; Springman, S.M. (2008). Choosing geotechnical parameters for slope stability assessments in alpine permafrost soils. In 9th international conference on permafrost. Fairbanks, USA: University of Alaska. pp.\u00a01261\u20131266. ISBN\u00a09780980017939. ^ Kia, Mohammadali; Sego, David Charles; Morgenstern, Norbert Rubin. \"FRP: Filter-less Rigid Piezometer for Measuring Pore-Water Pressure in Partially Frozen Soils\". Alpha Adroit Engineering Ltd. Alpha Adroit Engineering Ltd. Archived from the original on 2018-01-28. Retrieved 27 January 2018. ^ a b Schuur; et al. (2011). \"High risk of permafrost thaw\". Nature. 480 (7375): 32\u201333. Bibcode:2011Natur.480...32S. doi:10.1038/480032a. PMID\u00a022129707. ^ Walter KM, Zimov SA, Chanton JP, Verbyla D, Chapin FS (September 2006). \"Methane bubbling from Siberian thaw lakes as a positive feedback to climate warming\". Nature. 443 (7107): 71\u20135. Bibcode:2006Natur.443...71W. doi:10.1038/nature05040. PMID\u00a016957728. ^ C. Michael Hogan, Black Spruce: Picea mariana, GlobalTwitcher.com, ed. Nicklas Stromberg, November, 2008 Archived 2011-10-05 at the Wayback Machine ^ Hansen; et al. (2007). \"Viability, diversity and composition of the bacterial community in a high Arctic permafrost soil from Spitsbergen, Northern Norway\". Environmental Microbiology. 9 (11): 2870\u20132884. doi:10.1111/j.1462-2920.2007.01403.x. PMID\u00a017922769. \u2013 and additional references in this paper. Yergeau; et al. (2010). \"The functional potential of high Arctic permafrost revealed by metagenomic sequencing, qPCR and microarray analyses\". The ISME Journal. 4 (9): 1206\u20131214. doi:10.1038/ismej.2010.41. PMID\u00a020393573. ^ Bloom, A. A.; Palmer, P. I.; Fraser, A.; Reay, D. S.; Frankenberg, C. (2010). \"Large-Scale Controls of Methanogenesis Inferred from Methane and Gravity Spaceborne Data\" (PDF). Science. 327 (5963): 322\u2013325. Bibcode:2010Sci...327..322B. doi:10.1126/science.1175176. PMID\u00a020075250. ^ Walter, K. M.; Chanton, J. P.; Chapin, F. S.; Schuur, E. A. G.; Zimov, S. A. (2008). \"Methane production and bubble emissions from arctic lakes: Isotopic implications for source pathways and ages\". Journal of Geophysical Research. 113: G00A08. Bibcode:2008JGRG..11300A08W. doi:10.1029/2007JG000569. ^ Zimov, Sa; Schuur, Ea; Chapin, Fs, 3Rd (Jun 2006). \"Climate change. Permafrost and the global carbon budget\". Science. 312 (5780): 1612\u20133. doi:10.1126/science.1128908. ISSN\u00a00036-8075. PMID\u00a016778046.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Shakhova, Natalia (2005). \"The distribution of methane on the Siberian Arctic shelves: Implications for the marine methane cycle\". Geophysical Research Letters. 32 (9): L09601. Bibcode:2005GeoRL..32.9601S. doi:10.1029/2005GL022751. ^ Pfeiffer, Eva-Maria; Grigoriev, Mikhail N.; Liebner, Susanne; Beer, Christian; Knoblauch, Christian (April 2018). \"Methane production as key to the greenhouse gas budget of thawing permafrost\". Nature Climate Change. 8 (4): 309\u2013312. doi:10.1038/s41558-018-0095-z. ISSN\u00a01758-6798. ^ Shakhova, Natalia; Semiletov, Igor (2007). \"Methane release and coastal environment in the East Siberian Arctic shelf\". Journal of Marine Systems. 66 (1\u20134): 227\u2013243. Bibcode:2007JMS....66..227S. CiteSeerX\u00a010.1.1.371.4677. doi:10.1016/j.jmarsys.2006.06.006. ^ Gillis, Justin (December 16, 2011). \"As Permafrost Thaws, Scientists Study the Risks\". The New York Times. Archived from the original on 2017-05-19. Retrieved 2017-02-11. ^ S.A. Zimov, N.S. Zimov, A.N. Tikhonov, F.S. Chapin III (2012). \"Mammoth steppe: a high-productivity phenomenon\" (PDF). In: Quaternary Science Reviews, vol.\u00a057, 4\u00a0December\u00a02012, p.\u00a042\u00a0fig.17. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 17 October 2014.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Sergey A. Zimov (6 May 2005): \"Pleistocene Park: Return of the Mammoth's Ecosystem.\" Archived 2017-02-20 at the Wayback Machine In: Science, pages 796\u2013798. Article also to be found in www.pleistocenepark.ru/en/ \u2013 Materials. Archived 2016-11-03 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 5 May 2013. ^ \"Working Group I Contribution to the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report Climate Change 2013 - Summary for Policymakers - Template Lab\". 10 November 2015. Archived from the original on 2017-01-18. Retrieved 2017-01-16. ^ Sample, Ian (11 August 2005). \"Warming hits 'tipping point'\". The Guardian. Archived from the original on 2016-08-26. Retrieved 2016-12-12. ] ^ Schuur, E.A.G.; Vogel1, J.G.; Crummer, K.G.; Lee, H.; Sickman J.O.; Osterkamp T.E. (28 May 2009). \"The effect of permafrost thaw on old carbon release and net carbon exchange from tundra\". Nature. 459 (7246): 556\u20139. Bibcode:2009Natur.459..556S. doi:10.1038/nature08031. PMID\u00a019478781. Archived from the original on 2011-01-16. Retrieved 2010-11-17.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ \"Thaw point\". The Economist. 30 July 2009. Archived from the original on 2011-02-26. Retrieved 2010-11-17. ^ IPCC 2007. Summary for policy makers. In: Climate Change 2007: The physical basis. Working group I contribution to the fourth assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (eds. Solomon et al.). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. ^ UNEP 2011. Bridging the Emissions Gap. A UNEP Synthesis Report. 56 p. UNEP, Nairobi, Kenya ^ Clarke, Edwin S. (2007). Permafrost Foundations\u2014State of the Practice. Monograph Series. American Society of Civil Engineers. ISBN\u00a0978-0-7844-0947-3. ^ Isachenkov, Vladimir (February 20, 2012), \"Russians revive Ice Age flower from frozen burrow\", Phys.Org, archived from the original on 2016-04-24, retrieved 2016-04-26 ^ \"Anthrax Outbreak In Russia Thought To Be Result Of Thawing Permafrost\". Archived from the original on 2016-09-22. Retrieved 2016-09-24. External links[edit] Look up permafrost in Wiktionary, the free dictionary. Wikimedia Commons has media related to Permafrost. Permafrostwatch University of Alaska Fairbanks Infographics about permafrost International Permafrost Association (IPA) Center for Permafrost Map of permafrost in Antarctica. Permafrost \u2013 what is it? \u2013 YouTube (Alfred Wegener Institute) vtePeriglacial environmentLandforms Blockfield Bratschen Cryoplanation terrace Glacial erratic Paha Palsa Periglacial lake Pingo Protalus rampart Rock glacier Strandflat Glaciokarst Thermokarst Patterned ground Frost boil Polygons Solifluction lobes and sheets Sorted stripe Stone ring Processes Cryoplanation Cryosuction Cryoturbation Fluvio-thermal erosion Frost heave Frost weathering Gelifluction Ice segregation Methane release Nivation Solifluction Syngenetic permafrost growth Zero-curtain effect Soils and deposits Active layer Gelisols Ice wedge Loess Peat Permafrost Stratified slope deposit Talik Yedoma Biomes and ecotones Arctic tundra Arctic tree line Antarctic oasis Antarctic tundra Montane grasslands and shrublands Alpine tundra Alpine tree line (Massenerhebung effect) Taiga (Drunken trees) Climate Alpine Polar Subpolar Category:Periglacial landforms Template:Glaciers Authority control GND: 4129794-5 NDL: 00573185 Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Permafrost&oldid=888224086\" Categories: Arctic geography terminologyGeomorphologyMontane ecologyPatterned groundsPedologyPhysical geographyPermafrostWords coined in the 1940sHidden categories: CS1 Russian-language sources (ru)CS1 maint: Uses authors parameterCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listWebarchive template wayback linksCommons category link is on WikidataWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with NDL identifiers Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces ArticleTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages Afrikaans\u0627\u0644\u0639\u0631\u0628\u064a\u0629AsturianuB\u00e2n-l\u00e2m-g\u00fa\u0411\u0435\u043b\u0430\u0440\u0443\u0441\u043a\u0430\u044f\u092d\u094b\u091c\u092a\u0941\u0930\u0940\u0411\u044a\u043b\u0433\u0430\u0440\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0411\u0443\u0440\u044f\u0430\u0434Catal\u00e0\u0427\u04d1\u0432\u0430\u0448\u043b\u0430\u010ce\u0161tinaDanskDeutschEesti\u0395\u03bb\u03bb\u03b7\u03bd\u03b9\u03ba\u03acEspa\u00f1olEsperantoEuskara\u0641\u0627\u0631\u0633\u06ccFran\u00e7aisFryskGaeilgeGalego\ud55c\uad6d\uc5b4\u0540\u0561\u0575\u0565\u0580\u0565\u0576\u0939\u093f\u0928\u094d\u0926\u0940HrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaItaliano\u05e2\u05d1\u05e8\u05d9\u05ea\u10e5\u10d0\u10e0\u10d7\u10e3\u10da\u10d8\u049a\u0430\u0437\u0430\u049b\u0448\u0430Krey\u00f2l ayisyen\u041a\u044b\u0440\u0433\u044b\u0437\u0447\u0430Latvie\u0161uLietuvi\u0173LimburgsMagyarBahasa MelayuNederlands\u65e5\u672c\u8a9eNorskNorsk nynorskO\u02bbzbekcha/\u045e\u0437\u0431\u0435\u043a\u0447\u0430PolskiPortugu\u00easRom\u00e2n\u0103\u0420\u0443\u0441\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439\u0421\u0430\u0445\u0430 \u0442\u044b\u043b\u0430ScotsSimple EnglishSloven\u010dinaSloven\u0161\u010dina\u0421\u0440\u043f\u0441\u043a\u0438 / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / \u0441\u0440\u043f\u0441\u043a\u043e\u0445\u0440\u0432\u0430\u0442\u0441\u043a\u0438SuomiSvenska\u0ba4\u0bae\u0bbf\u0bb4\u0bcdT\u00fcrk\u00e7e\u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0441\u044c\u043a\u0430Ti\u1ebfng Vi\u1ec7t\u017demait\u0117\u0161ka\u4e2d\u6587 Edit links This page was last edited on 17 March 2019, at 19:09\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "Geology of southern African calcretes: 1. terminology, description, macrofeatures and classification. We use cookies to make interactions with our website easy and meaningful, to better understand the use of our services, and to tailor advertising. For further information, including about cookie settings, please read our Cookie Policy . By continuing to use this site, you consent to the use of cookies.Got ittopSee all \u203a64 CitationsDownload citationShare Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Google+ RedditRequest full-textGeology of southern African calcretes: 1. terminology, description, macrofeatures and classification.Article\u2002in\u2002Transactions - Geological Society of South Africa 83(2):255-283\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0January 1980\u2002with\u200265 ReadsCite this publication F. NetterbergAbstractCalcretes and other authigenic carbonate accumulations in the regolith in southern Africa are described in relation to their occurrence in the profile and their sequence of development. On the basis of secondary (chemical) structure, such materials can be classified in the field into calcareous soils, calcified soils, powder calcretes, glaebular calcretes, cutans, pedotubules, honeycomb calcretes, hardpan calcretes, calcrete boulders and calcrete cobbles. With simplification and addition of standard descriptors the classification is also suitable for geotechnical and other uses.-from AuthorDo you want to read the rest of this article?Request full-text Citations (64)References (0)... Within the red-bed succession on Spitsbergen, a variety of calcareous deposits are herein described as a part of the terrigenous ORS facies of Early Devonian age. Pedogenic, nodular calcretes have been classified by Beerbower (1964), Gile et al. (1966), Steel (1974), Allen (1974, 1986), Netterberg (1980) and Goudie (1983. Their occurrence is reported from various outcrops in different ORS basins, e.g.: from southern England (Allen 1974Allen , 1986 Leeder 1976; Parnell 1983; Wright et al. 1988), Scotland (Burgess 1961 ), the central Appalachians (Woodrow 1968; Allen & Friend 1968; Walker 1971) and from Spitsbergen ( Friend & Moody-Stuart 1970, 1972 Reed et al. 1987; Reed 1991; Lamar & Douglass 1995; Gebhardt et al. 2000). ...... The predominantly massive fabric of the host sediments particularly results from their fine-grained character , but also from intense organic destratification (bioturbation, pedoturbation), implying nodule formation in an oxygenated, near-surface palaeoenvironment . Tubular, partly downward-branching moulds are interpreted as animal burrows (Netterberg 1980) or root traces (Klappa 1980). Trace fossils associated with the calcretes have been interpreted as a proof of biological activity (Allen 1986). ...Calcareous, alluvial and lacustrine deposits in the Old Red Sandstone of central north Spitsbergen (Wood Bay Formation, Early Devonian)ArticleFull-text availableJan 2003NORW J GEOL Max Wisshak E Volohonsky Dierk Blomeier Michael M. JoachimskiWithin the silidelastic dominated red-bed strata of the Early Devonian Wood Bay Formation, various types of calcareous deposits, characterised by specific sedimentary structures, lithologies, microfacies, carbonate contents and stable isotope signatures, occur at different stratigraphie levels. Pedogenic, nodular calcretes with a thickness from 40 to 150 centimetres, associated with alluvial-plain and overbank sediments, represent palaeosol (calcisols, aridisols) development. The massive nodules show an internal mudstone fabric, calcium carbonate concentrations from 64 to 87 % and carbon and oxygen signatures of-5.3 to -6.4 and -8.5 to -9.9 \u2030, respectively. It is likely that they reflect a bio-induced carbonate precipitation in an oxygenated near-surface setting, connected with the evaporation of ground water. Single, up to some decimetres thick beds of calcareous mudstones and marls are characterised by a gradual colour change from reddish-brown to grey-violet upwards, and a meshwork of desiccation cracks at the top. The sediments show calcium carbonate concentrations from 22 to 43 % and carbon and oxygen isotope values ranging from -0.6 to -0.7 \u2030 and -7.6 to -8.8 \u2030, respectively. They are interpreted as deposits of relatively small, ephemeral lakes, formed by inorganic carbonate precipitation due to the evaporation of surface water. Individual beds and regressive, shallowing-upward sequences, up to a few metres thick, formed of calcareous mudstones to sandstones, marls to calcarenites and argillaceous to sandy limestones represent the depositional products of perennial, low-relief, low-energy lakes, These sediments yield carbonate concentrations from 20 to 81 % and a stable isotope composition of-2.1 to -3.1 %o for \u03b413C and -9.5 to -10.9 \u2030 for \u03b418O. They reflect deposition in basinal and littoral lacustrine and palustrine sub-environments, in which carbonate was formed due to inorganic, bio-induced and biotic precipitation. The different types of calcareous deposits formed under arid to semi-arid climatic conditions in various sub-environments of alluvial plains and perennial lakes. Their occurrence at different stratigraphie levels within the Wood Bay Formation can be related to a gradually increasing geomorphologic maturity of the terrestrial basin. The latter was marked by a decrease of the topographic relief and a lowering of sedimentation rates. An increase in landscape stability, combined with a general water-level rise led to the recurrent formation of broad lake plains in the centre of the basin.ViewShow abstract... In the Middle Triassic, palaeosol profiles are developed in red mudstones and siltstones (Fig. 1). Up to 19 different dolocretes in the Netterberg (1980) sense were recognised in no more than 20 m of the stratigraphic log (Fig. 5 ). Deposits of reworked palaeosol clasts are commonly incorporated into different profiles (Fig. 6A). ...... In the Middle Triassic, palaeosol profiles are developed in red mudstones and siltstones ( Fig. 1). Up to 19 different dolocretes in the Netterberg (1980) sense were recognised in no more than 20 m of the stratigraphic log ( Fig. 5). Deposits of reworked palaeosol clasts are commonly incorporated into different profiles ( Fig. 6A). ...Reworked calcretes: Their significance in the reconstruction of alluvial sequences (Permian and Triassic, Minorca, Balearic Islands, Spain)ArticleFull-text availableMay 2003SEDIMENT GEOL Ana M. Alonso-Zarza David G\u00f3mez-GrasThe Permian and Triassic of Minorca (Balearic Islands) consists of a 670-m-thick, red, alluvial succession that includes in situ calcrete profiles and reworked calcrete material. In the Permian succession, the calcretes vary from laminar forms developed on the Carboniferous basement to weakly developed nodular calcretes in fluvial sediments. The palaeosols in the Triassic are mostly dolomitic, and the profiles reach up to Stage III of soil development (Spec. Pap.-Geol. Surv. Am. 203, (1995) 1). The clasts, formed through reworking of the palaeosol profiles, are about 0.5\u201310 cm across and include mosaics of calcite/dolomite crystals, brecciated clasts, rhizolith fragments, and aggregates of clay and/or silt. These clasts appear in three different types of deposits. Type 1 corresponds to lenticular bodies that fill small scour surfaces, and consists only of intraformational conglomerates. These deposits are interpreted as ephemeral channels and sheet-floods that represent the interfluvial drainage systems that captured only the precipitation falling on the alluvial plain. Type 2 includes sand dune 3-D bodies with flat bottoms and convex tops. These bodies are about 20 cm high and 2 m wide, and were formed by floodwaters that flowed down the levees of the major streams. Type 3 channel deposits contain reworked calcretes and extrabasinal clasts, which overlie erosive surfaces and are found in layers within cross-bedded sandstones and conglomerates. These are interpreted as channel-floor lag deposits of major channels that entered from distant uplands and drained the alluvial plain.ViewShow abstract... karstic processes), making it somewhat weaker in the mass. Calcretes may range from calcified soils, calcium carbonate nodules or concretions, honeycomb calcretes (coalesced nodules) to mature hardpans ( Netterberg, 1980). Hardpans are typically 0.30.5 m thick, although superimposition of sequences of calcretes can create thick, complex profiles. ...Some near-surface desert features of significance in engineering geology evaluationsArticleFull-text availableSep 2013Q J ENG GEOL HYDROGE Edward Mark Lee Andrew B. Hart P. G. FookesIn most hot deserts Quaternary environmental changes have left their imprint on ground conditions, creating a legacy of materials that often reflect past as well as contemporary processes, and can appear unusual to geologists trained in temperate environments. Attention is drawn in this article to three near-surface features (duricrusts, palaeolakes and sulphate-rich soils) that reflect changing environmental conditions and that are of potential significance to engineering investigation, design and construction.ViewShow abstract... Finally, a third type of paleosol comprises dolocretes Mudflat carbonate occurs between lake margin dolo(in the sense of Netterberg, 1980) that developed close stone and open-lake carbonate that extends toward cento the lake margin facies (described below). This cartral parts of the basin ( Fig. 4). ...Sedimentology and geochemistry of carbonates from lacustrine sequences in the Madrid Basin, Central SpainArticleJun 1995CHEM GEOL Carol Kendall B.F. Jones J.P. Calvo Manuel BustilloLacustrine and alluvial carbonate facies have been investigated in Middle Miocene successions of the western side of the Madrid Basin in order to evaluate paleoenvironments in which carbonates formed. Carbonate facies are varied and include: (1) calcrete and dolocrete; (2) pond deposits; (3) lake margin dolostone; (4) mudflat carbonate; and (5) open-lake carbonate facies. The dominant mineralogy of these is dolomite and/or low-Mg calcite. No high-Mg calcite or aragonite have been detected in any sample. \u03b418O- and \u03b413C-values range from \u22128.20 to \u22121.80% PDB and \u221210.25 to \u22120.70% PBD, respectively. More negative \u03b418O- and \u03b413C-values correspond to predominantly calcite calcretes and to carbonate deposited in ponds at the foot of arkosic alluvium. Higher \u03b418O-values are from both lacustrine carbonate and dolocrete. This latter lithofacies has strong geochemical similarities to dolostones deposited in a lake margin environment. Mudflat carbonate, deposited on shallow platforms subject to lake water oscillation, shows great heterogeneity in both stable isotope value and trace-element content. The mineralogy of these carbonates is dominated by calcite and the limestones contain molds of gypsum. Occurrence of calcitized dolomite textures in these facies suggests the influence of fresher water during expanding lacustrine cycles or further interaction with less saline groundwater. Trace-element contents are considered to be potential indicators of the different carbonate facies types, thus aiding the paleoenvironmental interpretation. However, discrimination among carbonate facies on the basis of trace-element contents appears to be dependent on the statistical method utilized for treatment of data. More information is needed to ascertain their use as paleoenvironmental indicators.ViewShow abstract... The source of calcium carbonate in the calcrete deposits is not well understood but the calcrete deposits vary both laterally and vertically according to mode of formation, parent material and physical properties (Sulaimi 1988). Several classifications have been proposed, most of which have concentrated on either genesis, mineralogy or soil fabric, depending on the purpose of classification (Netterberg 1980; Netterberg and Caiger 1983). In Kuwait, a typical soil profile includes upper and lower uncemented soils with an intervening cemented horizon, which occurs in irregular and lenticular bands;Fig. ...Cone penetration resistance of calcareous sandArticleFull-text availableMar 2007B ENG GEOL ENVIRON Fathi ShaqourCalcareous sands form the foundation soils/structural fill for most of the engineering works in Kuwait, the Arabian Gulf countries and also act as structural fill. In situ calcareous sands are stronger than uncemented sand but lose much of their strength when re-worked or on wetting. The paper reports Dutch cone penetrometer tests on Jahra sand and Gatch under dry, wet and saturated conditions, using a specially designed sample box. The results showed that the penetration resistance (both tip and friction) of the uncemented sand increases upon wetting to an optimum with about a 70% increase from the dry, then decreases down to only 21% of the dry. With the calcareous sand, wetting was found to reduce the resistance in a directly proportional relationship, with a loss of resistance of 20% recorded at 7% water content and an 87% reduction when soaked. The friction ratio increased with increasing moisture content in uncemented sand but reduced to 50% in calcareous sands.ViewShow abstract... There is a very substantial literature on calcretes (e. g. Goudie 1973, Netterberg 1980, Wright & Tucker 1991, Milnes 1992, Paquet & Ruellan 1997, Watson & Nash 1997, Alonzo-Zarza 2003. A recent review by Wright (2007) reiterates the general perception that it forms at or near the landsurface but also includes description of groundwater calcrete which forms in some semi-arid to arid regions by precipitation in the shallow phreatic zone. ...An African surface weathering profile in the Kalahari of North West Ngamiland, Botswana: Processes and productsArticleFull-text availableSep 2010Z GEOMORPHOL Margaret Joan Mcfarlane Stephan Hermanus Coetzee Frank D. Eckardt S. RingroseA 128 m profile in the Kalahari of northwest Ngamiland, Botswana, is described. Textural, chemical and mineral characteristics of profile units were determined by XRF and ICP, EM, with EDAX, and XRD.Fifteen metres of aeolian sand overlies 14 m of residual sand, this overlying a saprolite profile. The parent bedrock was not reached but surviving primary minerals, quartz, feldspars and mica, indicate a crystalline rock. Within the saprolite there is up-profile depletion of Al and Fe and relative enrichment of carbonates, with maximum values directly below the residual sand.A model of profile development is presented. Quartz becomes rounded in situ by a process of progressive spalling of a thin layer of an (hydrated?) alteration product and is a relative accumulation. The carbonate-rich horizon is progressively enriched by repeated solution at the top of this profile unit and precipitation at the base, a process comparable to the relative accumulation of the silica-boxwork/garnierite horizon in Ni-laterite profiles.Fluvio-lacustrine Kalahari Sediments were not found, consistent with earlier deductions, based on remote sensing, that saprolite directly underlies the linear dune sand in North West Ngamiland. It is suggested that a shift in paradigm would resolve many outstanding problems regarding the origin of the Kalahari Sediments, i.e. a major part are autochthonous rather than allochthonousViewShow abstract... Calcretes are important components of semi-arid depositional systems and characteristic of regions experiencing a mean annual rainfall of around 500 mm ( Wright and Tucker, 1991). Therefore, calcretes are not only confined to soil profiles, when called pedogenic calcretes ( Netterberg, 1980;Machette, 1985;Wright and Tucker, 1991; Tandon and Gibling, 1997;Williams and Krause, 1998). They can also be formed, for instance, below the soil-forming zone, as groundwater or phreatic calcretes ( Wright and Tucker, 1991; Sp\u00f6tl and Wright, 1992;Rodas et al., 1994;Pimentel et al., 1996;Williams and Krause, 1998;Pimentel, 2002). ...Paleoweathering features in the Sergi Formation (Jurassic-Cretaceous), northeastern Brazil, and implications for hydrocarbon explorationArticleFull-text availableMar 2010J S AM EARTH SCI N. Pimentel Ana Maria P. Mizusaki Cristina Pierini Claiton Marlon dos Santos SchererPaleoweathering in the Sergi Formation has been classified and analyzed to ascertain its origin and relationship with stratigraphic evolution. The Sergi Formation belongs to the pre-rift sequence of the Rec\u00f4ncavo Basin (northeastern Brazil) and comprises a complex association of eolian and fluvial sandstones and lacustrine mudstones. This formation can be subdivided into three depositional sequences bounded by regional unconformities. Four paleoweathering types, each one related to a distinct origin, have been described in the Sergi Formation: (1) textural mottling, which is distinguished by alternating rock colors as a result of the iron oxide mobilization within mineral phases that evolved under alternating oxidation (yellowish, brownish and reddish shades) and reduction (grayish or greenish hues) conditions; (2) non-textural mottling, which displays a discoloration pattern that is independent of the original rock texture; (3) carbonate concentrations, usually related to carbonate nodule formation, which display a massive internal structure that reveals their origin through continuous growth or crystallization; and (4) banded carbonates (silicified), associated with the beginning of regular surface formation due to the chemical precipitation of carbonates within lacustrine environments. Both mottling color motifs and carbonate accumulation usually represent groundwater oscillation rather than pedogenesis. Only carbonate intraclasts and banded carbonate (silicified) have their origin ascribed to pedogenesis sensu stricto, although the carbonate intraclasts do not represent soil deposits in situ, but calcretes eroded from areas close to channels, and the banded carbonates (silicified) have strong diagenetic modifications. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that fluvial and meteoric water have controlled paleoweathering evolution as well as deposition, yet both aspects are ruled by the same mechanisms (relief, sedimentation rate and, above all, climate).ViewShow abstract... Sedimentary structures are rare and have obviously been affected by the pedogenic calcretisation process of the sands and gravels. This process, which not only alters the matrix diagenetically by carbonate replacement, also results in a significant increase in volume disturbing the original textures by physical expansion (Netterberg, 1980). Secondly and much later, small scale karstification ...The significance of the cretaceous diamondiferous gravel deposit at Mahura Muthla, Northern Cape province, South AfricaArticleFull-text availableDec 2009S AFR J GEOL J. D. Ward M.J. ROBERTS MichielC.J. de Wit Marion BamfordRemnants of diamond-bearing fluvial gravels of Cretaceous age have been preserved on the Ghaap Plateau north-west of Reivilo at 1455 m above sea level. The alluvial deposit contains well preserved fossil woods representing at least four periods: Post-Permian (Upper Karoo), Early Cretaceous, Late Cretaceous and Tertiary. The Karoo specimen has been derived from Beaufort Group sediments, now eroded from the Ghaap Plateau. More significant are the presence of Early and Late Cretaceous woods, both periods believed to have been wetter in the interior of southern Africa. In addition to the diamonds, other kimberlite derived minerals such as ilmenite and garnet have also been recovered from these gravels. Detailed mineral chemical analyses of the ilmenites and those occurring in primary sources within a radius of 120 km of the Mahura Muthla area indicate that the most likely source are kimberlites occurring to the south-south-east, indicating that the palaeo-channel was flowing from the south-east to the north-west. This is supported by the presence of ironstone and red chert cobbles and pebbles derived from the Proterozoic Kanguru Member outcropping directly south of the channel. Further evidence conies from a palaeo-tributary on Laurika which joined the main Mahura Muthla trunk stream from the south-west; limited pebble imbrications; and a decrease in the sizes of wood, agate and ironstone cobbles and pebbles in a northerly direction associated with an increase of roundness of these clasts. At the start of the Cretaceous the area was covered by sandstones of the Beaufort Group with overlying flood basalts of the Drakensberg Group. First during the Early Cretaceous the Mahura Muthla channel was incising into an easterly retreating palaeo-escarpment of Karoo basalts. Group 2 kimberlites such as Finch. Dadeston and Duivelskop, had already intruded these basalts around :120Ma. The north-westerly orientated drainage was directly linked to the drainage basin of the Kalahari River draining the northern part of the northern Cape and southern Botswana via the palaeo-Molopo and lower Orange River. This period of erosion would have released an abundance of agates from the basalts that are so abundantly present in the gravels and also diamonds from these Group 2 kimberlites. On comparing the mineral chemistry of the ilmenites the most likely source for these kimberlitic minerals is the area to the south east of Mahura Muthla. Kimberlites occurring in this area include the Duivelskop Group, X 154, Pienaarspoort, the Bellsbank Group, Bull Hill and Mayeng. At least some of these could have provided diamonds to the gravels. Later during Upper Cretaceous times the Karoo basalts had been removed and the drainage stripped the remaining sediments of the Beaufort Group before the sinuous channel became locked and preserved within the Transvaal dolomites. Subsequently the channel became calcretised during the development of the African Surface in the Early Tertiary. Mahura Muthla remained part of the Kalahari River basin which fed the Molopo River and the lower Orange drainage network and by the Early Tertiary the latter had captured the Vaal and the upper and middle Orange River drainage basin which had been part of the Karoo River drainage for most of the Cretaceous.ViewShow abstract... It is interpreted as representing a change from a marine to a terrestrial source of carbonate, precipitated from water of meteoric origin which was capable of perfusing and replacing the as yet unconsolidated silt when the area became tidal to sub-tidal during marine regression. Negative values for 6' 3C down to < -1 O%o are observed in terrestrial pedogenic carbonate (calcretes ) in southern Africa (Mazor et al., 1974; Netterberg, 1980). The partially parallel negative excursion in 6 \" 0 can similarly be interpreted as due to the dominance of meteoric water during at least part of this period of inferred marine regression . ...Implications of isotopic and other geochemical data from a Cretaceous-Tertiary transition in southern AfricaArticleOct 1990Chem Geol Isot Geosci Balthazar Verhagen Mahiban Lindsay Nesayyan Marian Tredoux Christian KoeberlIsotopic, palaeontological and geochemical details of a drill-core section at Richard's Bay, South Africa, are reported. Foraminiferal evidence shows that the section encompasses a transition from the Maastrichtian to the Danian, one of the very few sites in the Southern Hemisphere on land. The carbon isotope profile of the carbonate fraction shows a large negative excursion at the transition. The corresponding oxygen isotope excursion is largely parallel but less pronounced. It is argued that this Cretaceous-Tertiary (K/T) boundary is characterised by strong and well-identified local influences, seen in the mineralogy, in trace-element data, and in partially parallel carbon and oxygen isotopic signals. A possible scenario is presented in which marine regression is accompanied by increased influence of terrestrial material in this lagoonal environment. This could point towards similar, if often less pronounced, influences in some other well-documented K/T sites.ViewShow abstract... The term calcrete is synonymous with caliche, croutes calcaires, nari and The region taken up for detailed study falls in the state of Gujarat, western India, and is enclosed kunkar. Calcretes are understood to form through soil-forming (pedogenic) (Netterberg, 1980; between latitudes 22\u00b050\u221eN and 23\u00b045\u221eN and longitudes 72\u00b045\u221eE and 74\u00b0E ( Fig. 1). Tandon and Friend, 1989; Wright and Tucker, 1991; Tandon and Gibling, 1997; Zaleha, 1997; The state of Gujarat comes under the influence of the Southwest Indian Monsoon. ...The character and genesis of calcrete in Late Quaternary alluvial deposits, Gujarat, western India, and its bearing on the interpretation of ancient climatesArticleOct 2000PALAEOGEOGR PALAEOCL Rengaswamy Ramesh Aniruddha Khadkikar L. S. ChamyalLate Quaternary deposits in Mainland Gujarat contain sediments deposited in subhumid and semi-arid climates. The 30\u201335 m succession shows the presence of Vertisols at the base and a red-bed horizon (ferric Calcisol when pedogenic in origin) that roughly bisects the succession. A widespread development of calcretes is observed throughout the succession. The various varieties of calcrete include pedogenic calcrete, groundwater calcrete, calcrete conglomerate (transported calcrete) and rhizogenic calcrete. Pedogenic calcrete nodules associated with Vertisols and the red-soil show marked differences in morphology, dimensions and the distribution of microscopic features. These differences arise due to contrasting climate-controlled physicochemical environs under which they formed. Pedogenic calcrete nodules associated with Vertisols acquire large (5\u201310 cm) dimensions and are characterised by either showing the presence of a nucleus of soil-matter or showing a dense micritic groundmass cut by thick sparitic veins. In contrast, calcrete nodules that formed in the red-soil are <3 cm in size and do not exhibit dense networks of sparitic veins. Calcretes associated with Vertisols and the ferric Calcisol also exhibit differences in the morphology of rhizoliths. These differences also show up in the distribution of microfabrics of calcretes. Grain coats are present in rhizogenic and pedogenic calcretes, but absent in groundwater calcretes and less profuse in hydromorphic soil calcretes. Clotted micrite is present in all types except groundwater calcretes. Sparitic veins, however, are observed in each type, but are relatively less developed in groundwater calcretes. A similar distribution of displacive and replacive textures is also seen, although some grains in groundwater calcretes showed signs of corrosion. The Vertisol-associated calcretes represent a subhumid (500\u2013700 mm) climate, whereas the red-soil calcretes suggest a semi-arid (100\u2013500 mm) climate. Calcretes from the Vertisol association show a range in \u03b413C composition constrained between \u22129\u2030 and \u22125\u2030, whereas the red-soil calcretes exhibit the whole spectrum of values from \u22129\u2030 to \u22121\u2030. Based on mineralogical associations, calcretes, usually taken to reflect semi-arid episodes in the Earth's history, may be classified further. Calcretes, when associated with sepiolite/palygorskite, suggest an arid climate (mean annual rainfall=50\u2013100 mm), when associated with smectite, haematite and the absence of hydromorphism, a semi-arid climate (mean annual rainfall=100\u2013500 mm), and when found in smectitic Vertisols, subhumid climates (mean annual rainfall=500\u2013700 mm).ViewShow abstractMapping calcretes in Inhambane province, Mozambique, for use in road constructionArticleMay 2014B ENG GEOL ENVIRON Gareth HearnCalcretes have been used extensively in southern Africa, and elsewhere, for low-volume road construction. In Inhambane province of Mozambique, naturally occurring gravels are rare and calcrete is used wherever it is known to occur in reasonable proximity to the road network. While considerable research and development has been undertaken in Botswana, Namibia, and South Africa on the prospecting and engineering usage of calcrete, little work has been undertaken in Mozambique. Remote sensing and field probing, followed by trial pitting and laboratory testing were undertaken in order to locate hitherto unknown deposits of calcrete and to test its basic engineering properties for use in road construction. The findings from other parts of southern Africa were examined in terms of their applicability to Inhambane province, and the locations of existing calcrete borrow pits were examined to determine whether they had common geographical attributes that could assist in the identification of new sources. The study led to the discovery of approximately 20 locations of calcrete potential. Thirteen of these were investigated using trial pits, and ten of these yielded calcrete. A list of additional sites within the vicinity of the road network was developed from remote sensing. The occurrence of calcrete appears to be quite localised within the province and its location is governed by very subtle changes in topography and drainage regime, some of which may be inherited from past climate and environmental factors that are no longer apparent.ViewShow abstractCalcreteChapterMay 2008 V. Paul WrightThis chapter contains section titled:ViewShow abstractSoil-landscape relationship in the Middle Miocene of the Madrid BasinArticleFeb 1992Sedimentology Ana M. Alonso-Zarza J.P. Calvo WRIGHT M. \u00c1ngeles Garc\u00eda- -del-CuraThe Miocene alluvial-lacustrine sequences of the Madrid Basin, Spain, formed in highly varied landscapes. The presence of various types of palaeosols allows assessment of the effects of local and external factors on sedimentation, pedogenesis and geomorphological development. In the northern, more arid, tectonically active area, soils were weakly developed in aggrading alluvial fans, dominated by mass flows, reflecting high sedimentation rates. In more distal parts of the fans and in playa lakes calcretes and dolocretes developed; the former were associated with Mg-poor fan sediments while the latter formed on Mg-rich lake clays exposed during minor lake lowstands. The north-east part of the basin had a less arid climate. Alluvial fans in this area were dominated by stream flood deposits, sourced by carbonate terrains. Floodplain and freshwater lake deposits formed in distal areas. The high local supply of calcium carbonate may have contributed to the preferential development of calcretes on the fans. Both the fan and floodplain palaeosols exhibit pedofacies relationships and more mature soils developed in settings more distant from the sediment sources. Palaeosols also developed on pond and lake margin carbonates, and led to the formation of palustrine limestones. The spatial distributions and stratigraphies of palaeosols in the Madrid Basin alluvial fans suggest that soil formation was controlled by local factors. These palaeosols differ from those seen in Quaternary fans, which are characterized by climatically induced periods of stability and instability.ViewShow abstractA hydrological model for palygorskite formation in the Danian continental facies of the Provence Basin (France).ArticleFull-text availableJun 1998CLAY MINER Jelena Colson M\u00e9dard Thiry Isabelle CojanThe Danian of the Provence basin (SE France) is characterized by a strong subatmospheric alteration processes throughout the basin. A wide range of facies, depositional and weathering, were recognized in an interval of 5 Myr and include floodplain fine-grained alluvium, palustrine limestones, playa dolostones, mottled palaeosols, vadose and phreatic calcretes, and phreatic dolocretes. Palygorskite was invariably found in laminar, massive and honeycomb vadose calcretes and phreatic dolocretes, as well as in playa dolostones, and only exceptionally in floodplain siltstones, nodular calcretes and palustrine limestones. Regardless of the facies, palygorskite is associated with smectites. An authigenic origin, based on the morphology of the fibres and the vertical distribution of clay minerals, is proposed for palygorskites in all of the facies. The simultaneous occurrence of palygorskite in these environments is interpreted as a sign of a stable seasonal semi-arid climate and low detrital input during a period of low lake level (~0.5 Myr). The occurrence of authigenic palygorskite in siltstones around the lake was attributed to the rising of the water table, retention of the already saturated water in the pore spaces of the sediment, and its subsequent evaporation in a confined environment. A hydrogeological model is proposed for the distribution of palygorskite. The elongated shape of the Provence basin enhanced the influence of lateral inflow of freshwater during the low lake period which explains the distribution of palygorskite in different environments of the Provence basin as well as spatial distribution of phreatic calcretes and dolocretes. During the high lake level, palygorskite formed in the few remaining ephemeral ponds and on the floodplain along the lake margin.ViewShow abstractSedimentology and stratigraphy of upper Miocene deposits from the transverse valleys of La Pampa province, ArgentinaArticleDec 2013 Florencia R Lorenzo A.E. Mehl Marcelo Z\u00e1rateSedimentology and stratigraphy of upper Miocene deposits from the transverse valleys of La Pampa province, Argentina. In the distal foreland region of central Argentina the Mio-Pliocene continental record is widely distributed (Fig. 1a, Folguera and Z\u00e1rate, 2009). In La Pampa province it is represented by the Cerro Azul Formation (Fm) (Linares et al., 1980; Visconti, 2007) that involves the lapse between ca. 12-11? Ma and 5.8 Ma (Verzi and Montalvo, 2008; Folguera and Z\u00e1rate, 2009). This lithostratigraphical unit crops out along the walls and floors of the transversal valleys (Calmels, 1996) situated in the central-eastern sector of La Pampa province. The deposits are blanketed by aeolian silty sands and sandy silts mantles which together with the sand dunes systems usually located along the transversal valleys are considered of Late Pleistocene-Holocene age (Z\u00e1rate y Tripaldi, 2012). According to Visconti (2007) the outcrops of the Cerro Azul Fm consist of lacustrine, aeolian and fluvial facies. The lacustrine facies, made up of laminated claystones and sandy siltstones to very fine sandstones, have been stratigraphically placed at the base of the Formation. However, field work allowed recognizing the existence of similar deposits making up comparable geoforms at different absolute altitudes in several transversal valleys. This paper is focused on the sedimentological characteristics of these deposits and questions their stratigraphic position. Based on the observations and previous work, three working hypothesis are considered: the deposits are the oldest exposed stratigraphic sections of the Cerro Azul Fm as already stated; the deposits post date the valleys formation, hence they were accumulated within the valleys; the deposits represent similar and diachronic sedimentary settings during the accumulation of the Cerro Azul Formation. The study consisted of a sedimentological-pedological description and sampling coupled with the geomorphological analysis of the deposits at several localities in different transversal valleys of La Pampa (Fig. 1b). Textural, mineralogical (X-Ray difractometry) and micromorphological analyses of thin sections were carried at selected samples. A lithofacies approach was used to describe the deposits resulting in the identification lithofacies (Table 1) and facies associations following Miall's (2006) proposal, with a partially modified lithofacies code. Interpretations were made following Miall (2006), Reading (1996) and Nichols (2009). Two main geomorphic systems (SE1 and SE2) of different altitude are identified in the Nerec\u00f3, Hucal, Quehu\u00e9 and Chapalc\u00f3 valleys (Figs. 1b, 2a) resulting in a characteristic stepped topography. The deposits under study compose the SE2 with a relative height between 2 and 5 m above the valley floor, surrounding the deepest part of them; the lower stratigraphic contact remains unexposed. They are made up of unconsolidated sandy silt, silt and, secondarily, silty fine sand, either massive or with rare planar laminar bedding at some localities, while a dominant angular blocky structure is present at exposed sections. In some exposures, the deposits under study are featured by the occurrence of cutans and slickensides. Calcium carbonate is commonly present as powdery accumulations, nodules and concretions. The organic matter content varies from 0.03 to 1.17 %. At some levels the deposits exhibit layers of darker colors and higher concentration of organic matter with subprismatic secondary structure when dried. According to the grain-size and primary and secondary structures several lithofacies have been identified: Afm(f), Afb, Lab(c), Lab(mf), Lam(i), Lb(fc), Lal, Lab(cP), Afb(mfP) (Table 1), which were grouped into two main facies, A and B. Facies A represents abandoned channels of low relief and nonchannelized areas linked to low energy ephemeral streams/flows transporting sediments to the deepest part of the landscape. Facies B is interpreted as a paludal-like setting corresponding to poorly drained low energy aggradational environments. Both facies are gathered into facies association 1 (FA1), recognized in all the studied localities. It is interpreted as the record of low energy ephemeral fluvial and paludal-like environments, including episodes of higher water inputs linked to heavy rain events. This together with the geomorphological setting of the deposits suggests the occurrence of an aggradational process of low energy during the late Miocene in the interior of the valleys once they were already formed. Keywords: Ephemeral fluvial deposits; Cerro Azul Formation; Transverse valleys; Late Miocene; La Pampa; Argentina.ViewShow abstractMessinian to Pliocene transition in the deep part of the Sorbas Basin, SE Spain - A new description of the depositional environment during the Messinian Salinity CrisisArticleFull-text availableFeb 2011Neues Jahrbuch Geol Palaontol Abhand Anne Aufgebauer Tom McCannThe extent, timing and effects of the Late Miocene desiccation of the Mediterranean Sea during the period of the Messinian Salinity Crisis (5.96-5.33 Ma) remain controversial. In the Betic Cordillera of southeast Spain, close to the present-day Mediterranean, the Neogene Sorbas Basin contains one of the most complete sedimentary successions of this period. Recent work in the basin was mainly concentrated on the area around the town of Sorbas and the village of Cariatiz, both located along the Messinian palaeomargin of the basin. The present study presents a first detailed description of the sediments with precise facies reconstructions in the deepest part of the Sorbas Basin. The sediments are predominatly siltstones and sandstones, and belong to the Messinian Sorbas Member (5.67-5.5 Ma) and the Messinian to Pliocene Zorreras Member (5.5-5.33 Ma). It has been suggested that the fine-grained marine silt- and sandstones of the distal Sorbas Member show evidence of repeated fluctuations of sea level and restricted hypersaline conditions in the basin. The overlying continental silt- and sandstones of the Zorreras Member show evidence of intensive soil development processes. The uppermost part of this member contains high-energy marine sediments. We would strongly argue that both members were deposited during the main desiccation phase of the MSC, when the Sorbas Basin was cut off from the, at least partially, dried up Mediterranean Sea, and a reestablishment of normal marine conditions across the basin in early Pliocene.ViewShow abstractThe behaviour of uranium, thorium and tin during leaching from a coarse-grained porphyritic granite in an arid environmentArticleMay 1986J GEOCHEM EXPLOR C. FrickDuring the routine analysis of chip samples from water boreholes it was noted that the DeBakken granite south of Kenhardt has high uranium and tin contents. Rock samples collected on surface, however, revealed low concentrations of both these elements indicating that they have been leached from the surface samples. The distribution of thorium in the borehole profiles showed that while both tin and uranium have been removed above the water table, other \u201cimmobile\u201d elements and thorium remained unaffected.ViewShow abstractEarly diagenetic spherulitic siderites from Pennsylvanian palaeosols in the Boss Point Formation, Maritime CanadaArticleJun 2006Sedimentology G. H. BROWNE D. M. KingstonThe Boss Point Formation of Maritime Canada comprises alternating successions of braidplain sandstone, lacustrine mudstone, and lacustrine fluvio-deltaic sandstone and mudstone. These rocks were deposited within an active strike-slip basin during the early Pennsylvanian (Westphalian A), at a palaeolatitude of 8\u00b0S. Palaesols comprise a small but distinct proportion of the formation, and typically occur at the tops of fining upward sandstone-siltstone cycles. Spherulitic siderites from the Boss Point Formation occur within sandy and silty palaeosols. They occur as \u2018large\u2019 (>200 \u03bcm) and \u2018small\u2019 (<200 \u03bcm) diameter spherulitic nodules within calcrete, and show either a radially arranged ferroan calcite and siderite spar morphology, or contain a core of ferroan calcite, surrounded by a later formed sheath of siderite. Analytical data indicate that with respect to Ca-Mg-Mn, wide compositional variation occurs within the siderites. The Boss Point Formation siderites are similar to, but contain less Ca for a given Mg/Mn ratio, than previously published siderite compositional data. Published data, together with the results from the Boss Point Formation, indicate that a continuum exists in freshwater siderites, between the relatively Mn-depleted and the Mg-enriched analytical fields that were previously reported. The relatively low Ca values determined in the Boss Point Formation samples reflect the general lack of calcium in the sedimentary basin during sedimentation. Both chlorite and smectite clays may have been important sources of iron. It is concluded that the spherulitic siderites are eogenetic, and formed within small anoxic ponds rich in organic matter, under reducing and low dissolved sulphate conditions. With time these pools dried up, ferroan calcite precipitating as calcrete nodules around the earlier formed siderite spherulites.ViewShow abstractThe nature of calcareous deposits along pan margins in eastern Central NamibiaArticleJul 2002 Florias MeesIn a region along the western margin of the Kalahari in eastern Namibia and western Botswana, many pan basins have mainly calcareous deposits along part of their margins. These are typically lined by low vertical scarps. In Namibia, these pans are mainly located in dry river beds. The petrographical study of these deposits demonstrates that they consist of lacustrine sediments that have to a varying extent been affected by early-diagenetic processes and by the formation of late-diagenetic features. The original composition of the deposits ranges from highly calcareous sediments, typically with ostracod, diatom and charophyte remains, to entirely non-calcareous diatomites. The deposits generally show an upward increase in total carbonate content, which is mainly a synsedimentary feature. The early-diagenetic processes that affected the deposits include the formation of orthic siliceous nodules. At a later stage, secondary calcite enrichment occurred, leaving only the silica-impregnated sections unaffected. This enrichment partly accounts for the upward increase in total carbonate content in some profiles and often resulted in the development of a highly calcareous surface horizon. Sepiolite and amorphous silica that are part of the groundmass of the deposits may also partly have formed at this stage. Late-diagenetic features include various forms of secondary calcite and silica. This study of pan basins in eastern central Namibia indicates that a lacustrine rather than purely pedogenic origin should also be considered for calcareous deposits that commonly occur along pan margins in other parts of southern Africa. CopyrightViewShow abstractGroundwater dolocretes in a lake-marginal environment: An alternative model for dolocrete formation in continental settings (Danian of the Provence Basin, France)ArticleJun 2006Sedimentology Jelena Colson Isabelle CojanIn the long continental history of the Provence Basin which extended from Santonian to Oligocene times, a major period of palaeosol development occurred in the Danian. Dolocretes developed within floodplain silts, and partly from palustrine limestones. Dolocretes are overlain by pedogenic facies: calcretes and palustrine limestones. Gradational lower and upper limits of profiles, succession of nodular, coalescent and massive horizons, the epigenesis of quartz by dolomite, the unimodal crystal size and the euhedral dolomite fabric, as well as the absence of biogenic structures and vadose cements show that dolocretes formed in the phreatic zone. The exclusive occurrence of dolocretes around the palaeolake or playa suggests that dolocrete formed by the mixing of groundwaters and lake brines, which infiltrated the phreatic zone during periods of strong evaporation and lake level lowering. The term halo dolocrete is proposed to describe this type of dolocrete deposit. Subsequent alteration of the dolocrete includes leaching of the central core of dolomite crystals and calcitization. Calcitization was either fabric-destructive (type I) or fabric-preserving (type II) and took place during very early diagenesis, i.e. concomitant with calcrete formation or palustrine limestone deposition. Fabric-destructive calcitization is attributed to a drop in the lake level, when the upper part of the dolocrete was subjected to vadose zone processes, whereas the fabric-preserving calcitization resulted from reactions with dilute lake and groundwaters during rise in lake level.ViewShow abstractajpa22272DataFull-text availableMay 2013 Stephanie Edwards Baker Colin G Menter Andy I R Herries Philip J. HopleyViewOrigin and palaeo-environments of calcareous sediments in the Moshaweng Dry Valley, Southeast BotswanaArticleJun 2002 B. W. Vink A.B. Kampunzu William Samuel Downey S. RingroseQuaternary sedimentation in the Moshaweng dry valley of southeastern Botswana is evaluated on the basis of geomorphological evolution and sedimentological analyses. Stratigraphic evidence reveals an upper surface (1095 m) containing abundant sil-calcrete, an intermediate surface (1085 m) in which sil-calcrete underlies nodular calcrete and lower (1075 m) surface in which sil-calcrete and nodular calcrete are interbedded. This subdivision is reflected in the geochemical composition of the sediments which show an overall trend of decreasing SiO2 content (and increasing CaCO3 content) with depth from the highest to the lowest surface levels. The calcretes and sil-calcretes represent modifications of pre-existing detrital Kalahari Group sand and basal Kalahari pebbles which thinned over a Karoo bedrock high. Modification took place during wet periods when abundant Ca++-rich groundwater flowed along the structurally aligned valley system. With the onset of drier conditions, water table fluctuations led to the precipitation of nodular calcretes in the phreatic layer to a depth of about 20 m. A major geochemical change resulted in the preferential silicification of the nodular calcrete deposits. Conditions for silica mobilization may be related to drying-induced salinity and in situ geochemical differentiation brought about by pebble dissociation towards the top of the sediment pile. As calcretization and valley formation progressed to lower levels, silica release took place on a diminishing scale. Thermoluminescence dating infers a mid-Pleistocene age for sil-calcrete formation suggesting that valley evolution and original calcrete precipitation are much older. Late stage dissolution of CaCO3 from pre-existing surface calcretes or sil-calcretes led to the formation of pedogenic case-hardened deposits during a time of reduced flow through the Moshaweng system possibly during the upper or late Pleistocene. Copyright \u00a9 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.ViewShow abstractVariability of carbonate pedofeatures in a loess-paleosol sequence and their use for paleoreconstructionsArticleFull-text availableJun 2009J MT SCI-ENGL S. A. Sycheva Marina Pavlovna Lebedeva-Verba S. Inozemtzev Irina KovdaCarbonate pedofeatures were studied in details in a loess-paleosol pedocomplex near Kursk, in the central part of the European Plain. The soils studied included a modern Chernozem and five Pleistocene paleosols. Carbonate morphologies and distributions were described in the field. Various morphologies were sampled for further studies including micromorphology in thin sections and submicroscopic studies under a scanning electron microscope. The complex approach of investigation at macro-, micro-, and submicroscopic levels found that most of carbonate pedofeatures are secondary and multiphase. Many of them are related to cryogenic features. The general trend was of decreasing carbonate content in the older paleosols except for increased content in the 1st and 3rd paleosols. Most of carbonate morphologies are similar in the modern soil and paleosols, but pseudomycelium was found only in the modern Chernozem, while soft masses and impregnations are associated with the paleosols. Detailed study on carbonate attributes revealed their specific features in the modern soil and in paleosols. Veins have dissolution features under the modern environment and seem to reprecipitate in form of pseudomycelium. Coatings in paleosols at a depth of the 1st paleosol include specific fine tubes. Powdery soft masses and impregnations in the paleosols are strongly related to cryogenic fissures and paleopermafrost level. Under SEM they consist of tiny crystals, much smaller than in regular soft masses. Several types of hard concretions were identified: rounded, irregular and platy. Small concretions in the modern Chernozem have similar morphology and similar 14C-age as the rounded concretions of the upper paleosols. They are expected to represent the same generation of concretions. Platy concretions fill the bottom part of the large fissures. The 14C-age of hard concretions varies from 3310\u00b180 yrs. B.P in the 1st paleosol up to 20 400 yrs. B.P. in the 3rd. As a result we found the reflection of several wet-dry and cold-warm stages in carbonate morphologies and distributions. High variability of carbonates at macro-, micro- and submicroscopic levels indicates several generations and multiphase formation of carbonate pedofeatures in the loess-paleosol pedocomplex. Carbonate pedofeatures in the examined pedocomplex are more informative for the study of late Pleistocene and Holocene climatic cycles rather than characterization of a single paleosol.ViewShow abstractDuricrustsChapterJan 2009 John C. Dixon Sue McLarenWarm desert environments are characterized by the occurrence of a variety of surface and near-surface, chemically precipitated crusts, including calcrete, silcrete, and gypcrete, and their intergrades (Dixon 1994). Collectively, these are referred to as duricrusts (Woolnough 1930). This chapter focuses on the morphology, chemistry, mineralogy, and origin of the major types of crusts found in dryland environments. Particular attention is given to recent research from Australia, the United States, the Middle East and Africa.ViewShow abstractCalcareous Epigenetic Replacement (\u00abEpig\u00e9nie\u00bb) in Soils and Calcrete FormationChapterJan 1997 Alain Ruellan H. PaquetThis contribution is a review offering a new interpretation for the genesis of calcretes as defined by Goudie (1973). Calcretes are calcareous crusts which develop within weathering or soil profiles formed under warm climates with a marked dry season, excluding travertine or spring-, river- and water table cementations of various origins.ViewShow abstractIonic gold in calcrete revealed by LA-ICP-MS, SXRF and XANESArticleApr 2009GEOCHIM COSMOCHIM AC Melvyn Lintern Michael Verrall Robert Michael Hough Chris RyanHighly anomalous Au concentrations in calcrete were discovered in 1987 at the Bounty Gold Deposit, Western Australia. A strong correlation was noted between the Ca, Mg, Sr and Au in soil profiles which have not only attracted the interest of mineral explorers but also chemists, soil scientists, metallurgists and climatologists. Gold has been considered an inert element and so its strong association with the alkaline earth group of relatively mobile elements is both remarkable and intriguing. Despite widespread interest, there have been few published papers on the Au\u2013calcrete phenomenon. Here, we present work conducted on calcareous soil samples from above the Bounty mineralisation in Western Australia, prior to mining.ViewShow abstractLate Quaternary loess-like paleosols and pedocomplexes, geochemistry, provenance and source area weathering, Manasbal, Kashmir Valley, IndiaArticleFull-text availableJan 2017GEOMORPHOLOGY Babeesh Chalumbattil Aasif Mohmad Lone Manoj K. Jaiswal Hema AchyuthanThe late Quaternary loess and loess-like deposits in Kashmir Valley are natural archives that have preserved paleoclimate and paleoenvironmental records of the region. We present a loess-like paleosol located along the margin of the Manasbal Lake, Ganderbal, which was studied in detail for understanding the pedological processes and reconstructing the late Quaternary soil formation. In this paper we present loess-like paleosol formation of a nearly 10.6 m thick sequence exposed along the margin of Manasbal Lake, Ganderbal District, Srinagar, Kashmir. Geochemical and textural data of this loess-like sedimentary sequence fluctuate reflecting the varied depositional processes operating in the valley, differential intensity of weathering, and processes of pedogenesis. Weathering indices such as chemical index of alteration, chemical index of weathering, and plagioclase index of alteration reveal weak to moderate weathering of the parent material. Provenance discrimination diagrams of the present study disclose that the Manasbal loess-like paleosol sediments are derived from the mixed source rocks suggesting a variety of provenance with variable geological settings, which apparently have undergone weak to moderate recycling processes. The Manasbal paleosol horizons have been dated by the optically stimulated luminescence (OSL) method to the marine isotope stages mid-MIS-3 (41.7 \u00b1 8.0 ka) and late-MIS-2 (14.6 \u00b1 3.8 ka). During the MIS-3 period, the climate was wetter, forming a strong AhBtk paleosol as inferred from the geochemical data. A steady increase in the CaCO3 content and C/N ratio in the paleosols from 6.50 m (MIS-3) indicates arid and drier climatic conditions. The area around Manasbal Lake incised because of climate change and neotectonic activity since post-14 kaViewShow abstractTectonic and climatic controls on continental depositional facies in the Karoo Basin of northern Natal, South AfricaArticleFeb 1986SEDIMENT GEOL BRIAN R. TURNERThe eastern Karoo Basin, South Africa, contains a thick sequence of terrigenous clastic sediments comprising a meanderbelt facies, braided channel facies divided into coarse and fine subfacies, fluviolacustrine facies and aeolian facies. Depositional trends and changes in fluvial style reflect a progressive increase in aridity of the climate under stable tectonic conditions, interrupted by two phases of source area tectonism and the development of fine and coarse clastic wedges of the braided channel subfacies; the latter signifying a short interlude of cool, wet conditions. The fine braided channel subfacies occurs in the upper part of the meanderbelt facies, which was deposited by ephemeral, meandering mixed-load streams of variable discharge and sinuosity, under dry, semi-arid climatic conditions. These deposited complex, internally discordant channel sands and well-developed levee deposits. Following deposition of the coarse braided channel subfacies semi-arid conditions returned and fluvial deposition was dominated by ephemeral, straight to slightly sinuous mixed load streams characterised by simple channel sand bodies. As the aridity of the climate increased, the streams became more localised and carried an increasing proportion of fines. Interbedded with and overlying the fluvial deposits is a mudstone-dominated lacustrine sequence grading up into aeolian sands suggesting a playa lake-type situation. The general absence of evaporites from these sediments is attributed to the fresh nature of the lake waters, as evidenced by the freshwater aquatic organisms and clay-mineral suite, the lack of adequate inflow for solute accumulation and the removal of dust impregnated by salts from the surface of the dry lake bed during the dry season by superheated, upward-spiralling columns of air.ViewShow abstractBrief Communication: Beyond the South African cave paradigm- Australopithecus africanus from Plio-Pleistocene paleosol deposits at TaungArticleFull-text availableJun 2013Am J Phys Anthropol Stephanie Edwards Baker Colin G Menter Andy I R Herries Philip J. HopleyFollowing the discovery of the \"Taung Child\" (Australopithecus africanus) in 1924 in the Buxton-Norlim Limeworks near Taung, the fossil-bearing deposits associated with the Dart and Hrdli\u010dka pinnacles have been interpreted as the mined remnants of cave sediments that formed within the Plio-Pleistocene Thabaseek Tufa: either as a younger cave-fill or as contemporaneous carapace caves. When combined with the Plio-Pleistocene dolomitic cave deposits from the \"Cradle of Humankind,\" a rather restricted view emerges that South African early hominins derived from cave deposits, whereas those of east and central Africa are derived from fluvio-lacustrine and paleosol deposits. We undertook a sedimentological and paleomagnetic analysis of the pink-colored deposit (PCS) from which the \"Taung Child\" is purported to have derived and demonstrate that it is a calcrete, a carbonate-rich pedogenic sediment, which formed on the paleo-land surface. The deposit extends 100 s of meters laterally beyond the Dart and Hrdli\u010dka Pinnacles where it is interbedded with the Thabaseek Tufa, indicating multiple episodes of calcrete development and tufa growth. The presence of in situ rhizoconcretions and insect trace fossils (Celliforma sp. and Coprinisphaera sp.) and the distinctive carbonate microfabric confirm that the pink deposit is a pedogenic calcrete, not a calcified cave sediment. Paleomagnetic and stratigraphic evidence indicates that a second, reversed polarity, fossil-bearing deposit (YRSS) is a younger fissure-fill formed within a solutional cavity of the normal polarity tufa and pink calcrete (PCS). These observations have implications for the dating, environment, and taphonomy of the site, and increase the likelihood of future fossil discoveries within the Buxton-Norlim Limeworks. Am J Phys Anthropol, 2013. \u00a9 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.ViewShow abstractPost-Gondwanan continental sedimentation, Limpopo region, southeastern AfricaArticleFull-text availableAug 1996J AFR EARTH SCI MichielC.J. de Wit Gregory A. BothaThe post-Karoo age sedimentary succession known formerly as the Malvernia Formation, is currently termed the Malonga Formation, \u2018Forma\u00e7ao de Sena\u2019, \u2018Forma\u00e7ao de Singu\u00e9deze/Elefantes\u2019 and Gona-re-Zhou Plateau Beds in the Limpopo Basin region where South Africa, Mozambique and Zimbabwe have common borders. These rocks represent continental, taphrogenic sedimentation on the eastern margin of the emergent African continent after the breakup of Gondwana. The wide occurrence of this system along the northern Lebombo mountains and within the tectonically active Limpopo and Zambezi valleys, suggests the existence of a peidmont landsurface comprising coalesced alluvial fans and major fluvial channel/floodplain systems close to the continental margin during the Late Mesozoic to Early Cainozoic era.ViewShow abstractThe association of gold with calcreteArticleNov 2014ORE GEOL REV Melvyn LinternThe discovery that Au accumulates in calcrete (pedogenic carbonate or caliche) was made in 1987 by CSIRO. Calcrete is a general term describing accumulation of alkaline earth metals in soils of arid and semi-arid terrains around the world. The principal constituent of calcrete is calcite while Au is a noble metal. Calcrete has been a significant tool in a number of Au deposit discoveries, so understanding the mechanisms by which these diametrically different components come together is valuable for enhancing future discovery. Numerous laboratory experiments, case histories and exploration models have been published (most from Australia) yet we do not fully understand the mechanisms involved. It is timely, therefore, twenty-five years on since the first publication of this phenomenon, to review this highly unusual but economically important association.Critical to any review on Au in calcrete is to first consider calcretes themselves. The nature of a particular calcrete, where it has formed and mode of formation is relevant to how, where and why Au accumulates within it. This review commences with a background, nomenclature, history, classification and some examples of calcrete types found near Au deposits. How calcretes form, their origins and the role of biota is considered. Their locations in the regolith and landscape, as well as exploration models for Au in calcrete are discussed. A section on the chemistry of Au in calcretes details what we know about possible mechanisms of formation and considers what laboratory experiments on microorganisms and abiotic experiments tell us. Following on is a summary of practical aspects of identifying, collecting and analysing samples for exploration purposes. Selected mineral exploration case histories are described and how they fit into models of exploration and different regolith settings. Concluding sections include a summary and implications of this accumulated knowledge to discovering Au deposits.ViewShow abstractExperimental studies on the gold-in-calcrete anomaly at Edoldeh Tank Gold Prospect, Gawler Craton, South AustraliaArticleJan 2012Fuel Energ Abstr Robert Michael Hough Melvyn Lintern Chris RyanCalcrete sampling is the near-surface exploration method of choice for Au in many drier parts of the world, particularly southern Australia. Edoldeh Tank is a weakly mineralised Au prospect in calcrete terrain that lies at the eastern edge of the Great Victoria Desert dunefield (South Australia). At Edoldeh Tank a variety of calcretes occur but the dominant form is a laminated calcrete horizon (LCH). The mineralogy of the near-surface soil is relatively simple and consists of calcite, dolomite, quartz, kaolinite and minor smectite; quartz dominates the unconsolidated overlying sandy soil, and carbonate minerals dominate the LCH. We determine the distribution and nature of the Au at a small scale using a variety of techniques, including SEM, LA-ICP-MS and SXRF and dated sediments to understand calcrete genesis. In a series of thirty excavated soil pits, Ca and Au concentrations increased with depth, markedly so at the LCH. We provide multiple lines of evidence to show there is a general association of Au with calcrete but not a strong correlation as seen with soil profiles elsewhere that have younger, recently formed powdery calcrete. Experiments suggest Au and Ag are currently mobile in this environment despite the low rainfall and that Au occurs in two forms: Au (possibly ionic) occurs throughout the sample with some regions having higher concentrations than others; particulate Au occurs randomly but is more common where the general level of Au is higher. The laminated nature of the calcrete suggests it has formed episodically. An association of Ag with Au in calcrete suggests a means to distinguish anomalies that have developed in residual regolith from those that have dispersed into adjacent sediments. Laminated calcrete is just as effective an exploration sample medium as powdery calcrete. Mobilised Ca, Au and Ag in calcrete can extend the lateral extent and distance from the source of the geochemical anomaly thus providing an effective vector to target for sampling. A landscape dispersion model of Au in calcrete is presented, which requires further testing, to assist the mineral explorer in covered terrains.ViewShow abstractOrigin of calcrete and dolocrete in the carbonate mantle of St Vincent basin, southern South AustraliaArticleFull-text availableJan 2010 John C. DixonCalcrete profiles developed in a toposequence in the carbonate mantle covering the landscape in the St Vincent Basin South Australia are examined. Strong trends in morphology, chemistry and mineralogy are observed from higher to lower profile and topographic locations. Carbonate profiles are dominated by calcrete in both higher profile and toposequence locations while dolocrete dominates in lower profile and toposequence locations. These changes are accompanied by progressive increases in dolomite abundance and decreasing calcite abundance and reflected in decreasing Ca/Mg ratios with depth and decreasing toposequence elevation. Observed trends are explained in terms of profile leaching and groundwater drainage.ViewShow abstractEVOLUCION Y GENESIS DE CALCRETAS PEDOGENICAS EN LA PALEOBAHIA DE TONGOYThesisFull-text availableJun 2011 Marco PfeifferEn la paleobah\u00eda de Tongoy (30\u00b0S), ubicada en Chile centro-norte, se encuentran cuatro terrazas de abrasi\u00f3n marina, denominadas TV, TIV, TIII y TII, las cuales se asocian a los estadios isot\u00f3picos marinos (MIS, por sus siglas en ingl\u00e9s) MIS 1, MIS 5e, MIS 7 y MIS 11. Sobre las tres terrazas m\u00e1s antiguas, se desarrollan suelos carbon\u00e1ticos cementados, que se conocen en la literatura como calcretas. Las calcretas de Tongoy alcanzan un estado de desarrollo maduro en las tres terrazas donde se presentan, llegando en la terraza TII al estado VI en la secuencia de desarrollo de Machete (1985), el cual corresponde al m\u00e1s avanzado. La formaci\u00f3n de estas calcretas responde a una serie de procesos pedog\u00e9nicos, los cuales dan cuenta de una ciclicidad en el paleoclima de la zona. Las calcretas estudiadas, se subdividen en calcreta masiva, calcreta laminar y calcreta brechosa, esta \u00faltima presente solo en la terraza TII que corresponde a la m\u00e1s antigua. La calcreta masiva posee una serie de rasgos que muestran la participaci\u00f3n de organismos en la precipitaci\u00f3n del carbonato, presentando una f\u00e1brica de tipo \u201cbeta\u201d. La calcreta laminar presenta una f\u00e1brica de tipo \u201calfa\u201d, que corresponde a la precipitaci\u00f3n de calcita por procesos f\u00edsico-qu\u00edmicos. La calcreta brechosa, corresponde al fracturamiento de la calcreta laminar, y se da en estados avanzados de desarrollo de este tipo de suelos. El desarrollo de calcretas se da en determinados climas, por lo que su presencia en las terrazas TII, TIII y TIV sugieren condiciones clim\u00e1ticas similares entre el MIS 11 (412 ka) y posterior al MIS 5e (125 ka). Sin embargo, existen rasgos y procesos que sugieren la existencia de fluctuaciones entre climas m\u00e1s \u00e1ridos y m\u00e1s h\u00famedos que el \u00f3ptimo para la formaci\u00f3n de calcretas. A modo de ejemplo se pueden citar la presencia de cristales de yeso y halita en las partes bajas de la calcreta masiva de los perfiles de la terraza TII, los cuales indican la presencia de climas \u00e1ridos previo a la formaci\u00f3n de la calcreta masiva; mientras que la presencia de arcillas iluviadas en el l\u00edmite entre la calcreta masiva y laminar, sugiere la ocurrencia de per\u00edodos con mayor cantidad de precipitaciones, las que habr\u00edan disminuido posteriormente para generar la calcreta laminar. La ocurrencia de paleocanales en los niveles TIV y TII que erosionan la calcreta, indican per\u00edodos con presencia de precipitaciones torrenciales, posterior a los cuales no se form\u00f3 calcreta de ning\u00fan tipo, ya sea por no existir las condiciones clim\u00e1ticas necesarias, o bien por ser fen\u00f3menos de data reciente. Esta ciclicidad clim\u00e1tica reflejada en los procesos geomorfol\u00f3gicos y pedog\u00e9nicos, mediante la aplicaci\u00f3n de m\u00e9todos de dataci\u00f3n absoluta, permitir\u00e1n realizar estudios de paleoambiente en la zona, aportando con datos paleoclim\u00e1ticos hasta el MIS 11, para una zona que carece de informaci\u00f3n de largo plazo. En este sentido, este estudio constituye una base en la cual se explican los procesos pedog\u00e9nicos asociados a una cronosecuencia de suelos desarrollados sobre terrazas de abrasi\u00f3n marina, los cuales pueden ser utilizados a futuro para la reconstrucci\u00f3n paleoclim\u00e1tica del Norte Chico.ViewShow abstractIdentification of sources and infiltration regimes of nitrate in the semi-arid Kalahari: Regional differences and implications for groundwater managementArticleFull-text availableDec 2011 J Wrabel Susanne Stadler Siep Talma Gideon TredouxThe Kalahari region of southern Africa offers much potential for nitrogen input into its groundwater. High nitrate concentrations in Kalahari groundwater are therefore quite common and are caused by both anthropogenic and natural sources. Forecasting groundwater nitrate concentrations remains challenging. Source identification of nitrate contamination in groundwater is an important first step for groundwater management and quality prediction, and is aided by isotope analysis of nitrate in the water. Comparative data from 3 groundwater study sites in the Kalahari of Botswana and Namibia with widely different characteristics are presented. Two of the sites (Ghanzi and Gobabis) have shallow water tables in fractured quartzite. These aquifers were affected by pollution from cattle wastes (manure) and septic tank outflows resulting in groundwater nitrate levels exceeding 1 000 mg NO3/\u2113 and in \u03b415N values of between +7 and +20 %o AIR. Short-term increases of groundwater nitrate concentrations were triggered by exceptional rainfall events occurring every 10-20 years. At the third site (Serowe in Botswana) there is similar land use and land cover, yet the aquifers are deeper, groundwater dates to Late-Pleistocene age and borehole levels do not show a response to present-day high-rainfall episodes. Nitrate levels up to 219 mg/\u2113 are found, but lower 15N content (\u03b415N of +3 to +8 0/00) indicates a natural origin of the nitrate. In this area pollution nitrate is sufficiently delayed in the vadose zone, reaching the saturated zone much later. The data from all 3 sites suggest that nitrogen management options can only be evaluated once an understanding of sources, processes and flow patterns has been established.ViewShow abstractCalcium Carbonate FeaturesChapterDec 2010 Matthew Canti Curtis Monger Nicolas DurandThe precipitation of calcium carbonate is common in soils and regoliths, especially in soils of arid environments. The precipitation and the accumulation of calcium carbonate in soils and regoliths are very complex phenomena. As they are linked to the interaction between the lithosphere, the biosphere, and the atmosphere, pedogenic carbonates may be important proxies of paleoenvironmental changes. The study of the morphological expression and hierarchical organisation of calcitic pedofeatures in thin sections allows us to partially decipher the climatic, geochemical, and biological influences on the precipitation of carbonates in soils. With the contribution of submicroscopic techniques (e.g., SEM), progress has been made in the understanding of the relation between the biological activity and the precipitation of carbonate, and many calcitic features seem to be linked to biological processes, in a direct or indirect manner. The carbonates may represent a highly active phase, undergoing intense transformation such as recrystallisation, dissolution, and secondary carbonate precipitation.ViewShow abstractCalcareous crusts on exposed Pleistocene limestones: A case study from Grand Cayman, British West IndiesArticleJan 2013SEDIMENT GEOL Rong Li Brian JonesCalcareous crusts, which include laminar (up to 6 cm thick) and non-laminar calcretes, have developed on ooid grainstones and skeletal wacke/pack/grain/floatstone in the Pleistocene Ironshore Formation exposed at Morgan\u2019s Harbour, Tarpon Springs, and Rogers Wreck Point on Grand Cayman, British West Indies. Non-laminar calcretes, which consist largely of micrite with variably altered skeletal fragments and lithoclasts derived from the host limestone, contain peloids in their basal parts. In contrast, the laminar calcretes are formed of porous laminae and low-porosity laminae. Calcified roots are common in the porous laminae but rare in the low-porosity laminae. The \u03b418O values of calcretes, from \u20135.22\u2030 to + 0.16\u2030, have a positive correlation with the \u03b413C values that vary from -10.03\u2030 to -6.41\u2030 at Tarpon Springs, from -11.57\u2030 to -5.43\u2030 at Morgan\u2019s Harbour, and from -9.89\u2030 to -8.68\u2030 at Rogers Wreck Point. The non-laminar calcretes reflect progressive micritization of the bedrock with a basal peloidal zone that passes upward into the micrite zone. In contrast, laminar calcretes are attributed to accretionary build-up dictated by microscale processes that were controlled largely by the interplay of plant roots and their associated microorganisms. The positive correlation between the \u03b418O and \u03b413C values from the calcareous crusts indicates that evaporation influenced calcite precipitation. The \u03b413C values of the laminar calcretes record a change from vegetation dominated by C3 plants that grew in a cool, wet climate, to a C3/C4 vegetation that grew in a hotter, drier climate. The Cayman calcretes resemble those found on the Pleistocene Miami Limestone in Florida, and highlight the possibility that these calcareous crusts may reflect regional climates and may therefore enable regional stratigraphic correlation.ViewShow abstractSoft-sediment deformation structures in Late Miocene\u2013Pleistocene sediments on the pediment of the M\u00e1tra Hills (Visonta, Atk\u00e1r, Verseg): Cryoturbation, load structures or seismites?ArticleDec 2005TECTONOPHYSICS Zolt\u00e1n Horv\u00e1th Judit Ber\u00e9nyi-\u00dcveges Erika Micheli A. MindszentyThe studied area, built up by silty clayey and partly sandy sediments and paleosols, lies on the tectonically active Northern margins of the Pannonian Basin. Wavy, sagging load casts can be observed in the upper part of the Late Miocene alluvial complex and larger scale sagging load casts, flame structures, drops and pillows detected in its Quaternary cover were studied in detail, in order to understand the origins of soft sediment deformation which characterized this young sedimentary suite. Sedimentological, paleopedological and mineralogical observations suggest that:ViewShow abstractThe contributions of geometallurgy to the recovery of lithified heavy mineral resources at the Namakwa Sands mine, West Coast of South AfricaArticleOct 2011MINER ENG A. Rozendaal Carlo PhilanderThe Namakwa Sands heavy mineral deposit is located at Brand-se-Baai along the West Coast of South Africa and is a world class producer of premium quality zircon (ZrSiO4), ilmenite (FeTiO3) and rutile (TiO2) concentrates from mainly aeolian sands. Superimposed on the coastal clastic Cainozoic ore-bearing sequence is a calcium\u2013magnesium-rich pseudo-stratigraphy locally referred to as cemented hard layers that effectively lithify the mineralised sands to various degrees of hardness, rendering it unsuitable for routine treatment by wet spirals. Namakwa Sands has recently completed an expansion programme, inclusive of a SAG mill and screen installation, which allows the processing of the cemented hard layers, the first ever in the mineral sands industry. Operationally, the SAG mill and screen are performing well in tandem and are helping to improve mineral resource utilisation to levels not previously possible. Contained zircon output has increased, but at the cost of marginally lower recoveries as predicted from pilot studies. This paper reports on the systematic geometallurgical approach to improve mineral resource utilisation by successfully processing lithified ore.ViewShow abstractDesert Crusts and Rock CoatingsChapterMar 2011 David J NashIntroductionSodium nitrate depositsHalite crustsGypsum crustsCalcreteSilcreteDesert rock coatingsPalaeoenvironmental significance of crustsReferencesViewShow abstractSoils of South AfricaArticleJan 2010 J. Lambrechts M. Fey J. Hughes Anthony Jan MillsSoils of South Africa is the first book in seventy years that provides a comprehensive account of South African soils. The book arranges more than seventy soil forms into fourteen groups and then provides, for each group: \u2022 maps showing their distribution and abundance throughout South Africa \u2022 descriptions of morphological, chemical and physical properties \u2022 a detailed account of classification and its correlation with international systems \u2022 a discussion of soil genesis which includes a review of relevant research papers \u2022 appraisal of soil quality from a land use perspective as well as for its ecological significance \u2022 illustrative examples of soil profiles with analytical data and accompanying interpretations. There is also a fascinating account of the special relationship that exists between South African animals and soil environments. Soils of South Africa should interest students and researchers in the earth, environmental and biological sciences, as well as environmental practitioners, farmers, foresters and civil engineers.ViewShow abstractFluvial facies patterns and chemical sediments. Their control on U, Ba, and base metal concentration in the \u00bbBurgsandstein\u00ab (Upper Triassic Keuper, SE Germany)ArticleFull-text availableJun 1988Geol Rundsch Z Allg Geol Harald G. DillThe Upper Triassic clastic \u00bbKeuper\u00ab beds in southern Germany have attracted much attention during the last decades for their sandstone-hosted U deposits in the \u00bbBurgsandstein\u00ab, in particular. Paleogeographically this arenaceous-argillaceous sequence is compared with a fanplaya environment, showing a great variety of fluvial drainage patterns (distal braided stream, meandering streams displaying different degrees of sinuosity). Aside from this, duricrusts (dolcretes/calcretes, petrified wood/\u00bbsilcretes\u00ab, phosphatized arkoses/phoscretes) are widespread in these arenaceous beds. Both, clastic and chemical sediments, play a significant part for metal concentration. Ore enrichment is of two principal types, early and late diagenetic. They were deeply influenced by the basin subsidence. Phosphatization concomitant with U precipitation took place near the fan head, whereas silicified wood and calcretes are more common within a transition from the fan towards the playa, where meandering rivers predominate. Uraniferous calcretes partly originated from paleosols, partly from ground water percolation. At a subsequent stage, these carbonate encrustations locally got reworked. U black ores containing Cu, Pb, Fe, Zn, and Co-sulfides were precipitated from ground waters when entering less permeable lithologies. Ground water stagnated at the playafan boundary or, on a more local scale, between fluvial channels and overbank or crevasse splay depositions. Eh and pH changes are suggested to have been controlling the U and sulfide concentration.ViewShow abstractChapter 12 Paleosol Recognition: a Guide to Early Diagenesis in Terrestrial SettingsChapterDec 1992 V.P. WrightPaleosols\u2014 that is, soils formed on a landscape of the past are now being widely recognized in the geological record, and are potentially very powerful tools for a variety of paleoenvironmental purposes. They have also been used as indicators of porosity evolution in ancient limestones. A variety of criteria is used for recognizing paleosols. Some are not replicated by sedimentological or other diagenetic processes and so provide unique and diagnostic evidence. Paleosols can be recognized based on their biological features, color, destratification, horizonation and boundaries, granulometrics, mineral assemblages, macrostructures, and micromorphology. Many of the features used to recognize paleosols are subtle and prone to alteration during diagenesis, but surprisingly little work has been carried out on these problems. The physical effects of burial diagenesis, such as compaction and pressure solution, are relatively easily recognized as overprints. Many major changes can occur very early in the burial history of the paleosol, and two common situations require consideration. The first is that of an aggrading floodplain, and second, a paralic setting during a transgression.ViewShow abstractGroundwater dolocretes from the Upper Triassic of the Paris Basin, France: A case study of an arid, continental diagenetic faciesArticleDec 1992Sedimentology Christoph Spotl V. P. WrightThick dolomite-cemented horizons (dolocretes) occur within a fluvial sandstone-mudstone sequence of Late Triassic age in the western part of the Paris Basin, France. Two types of dolomites can be distinguished: (a) nodular dolomitic beds less than a few metres thick, which formed within mottled overbank siltstones and mudstones; and (b) massive dolomite up to 16 m thick, which occurs in coarse grained channel sandstones and conglomerates. The majority of the dolomite consists of a finely crystalline groundmass of dolomicrospar and, less commonly, dolomicrite. Glaebules, irregular spar-filled cracks, spheroidal dolomite, silicification and vuggy porosity are locally abundant in the massive dolomite. In contrast, biologically induced micromorphological features such as rhizocretions and alveolar-septal fabrics were observed in the thin, nodular dolomite beds. The dolomite is near stoichiometric, well ordered and non-ferroan. 18O values range from \u22127\u00b77 to \u22120\u00b74%o PDB and 18O values range from \u22125\u00b71 to + 1\u00b78%0 PDB and no obvious difference in the stable isotopic composition between both types of dolomites was observed. Sr isotope ratios range from 0\u00b77101 to 0\u00b77126 and are invariably higher than the contemporary Triassic sea water. A vadose\u2014pedogenic origin for the thin dolocrete layers is indicated by the occurrence of rhizocretions and other biological structures. Several features, however, argue against a pedogenic origin for the massive carbonates, most notably the absence of biologically induced structures, the occurrence in coarse grained channel (and not overbank) deposits, and the great thickness. These units are thus interpreted as groundwater in origin. Phreatic calcretes of Quaternary age, widespread in inland Australia, are regarded as a modern analogue for the Triassic Paris Basin dolocretes. Petrographic observations argue in favour of primary (proto)dolomite precipitation, although early diagenetic replacement of calcite by (proto)dolomite cannot be ruled out. Strontium and carbon isotope data of early diagenetic dolocrete cements and oxygen isotope data of early diagenetic silica indicate an entirely non-marine, continental origin for the groundwaters. The poorly ordered and non-stoichiometric protodolomite probably underwent stabilization upon further burial resulting in a near-stoichiometric, well ordered dolomite that clearly lacks evidence for pervasive recrystallization.ViewShow abstractMicromorphology, submicroscopy and microprobe study of carbonate pedofeatures in a Vertisol gilgai soil complex, South RussiaArticleDec 2003CATENA Irina Kovda L.R. Drees L. P. WildingCarbonate nodules and soft masses were studied in a gilgai soil complex in the North Caucasus, South Russia. Microrelief with an amplitude about 30 cm resulted in a wetter environment with stronger leaching in the microlow and a drier pedoenvironment with carbonate accumulation in the microhigh. Various macroforms of carbonate nodules and soft masses were identified in soil pits and sampled for micromorphology, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and microprobe analyses to better characterize them and elucidate their pedogenesis. Common and unique attributes were described for carbonate pedofeatures depending on loci in gilgai soil complex. The most probable hypothesis for their formation is as follows. Nodules represent early pedogenic products that were initiated before gilgai formation. Modern hydrology resulted in variability of dissolution/recrystallization of the nodules along the gilgai microtopography. The variability in degree of impregnation, aggregation into pellets, and presence of hard nodular cores reflects several generations of soft masses.ViewShow abstractSedimentolog\u00eda y estratigraf\u00eda de dep\u00f3sitos del Mioceno tard\u00edo de los valles transversales de la provincia de La Pampa, ArgentinaArticleDec 2013 Florencia R Lorenzo A.E. Mehl Marcelo Z\u00e1rateViewBreccias and ores. Part 1: History, organization and petrography of brecciasArticleAug 1989ORE GEOL REV Peter LaznickaAlthough the term breccia is one of the oldest rock names still in use and proliferating in its application, a satisfactory definition remains problematic and an overall classification of breccias is non-existent. The names of breccia varieties (several hundred) please the heart rather than the computer, and there is little interdisciplinary correlation among the more than fifty specialized schools of breccia study.This contribution reviews briefly the history of breccia research and provides a list of the present study trends, complete with references, with emphasis on ore-associated breccias wherever possible. Conventional breccia definitions and their shortcomings are discussed and a case is made for the introduction of the petrographic category of \u201ccoarse fragmentites\u201d of which the \u201ctypical\u201d sedimentary breccias and conglomerates as well as volcanic, tectonic, hydrothermal, impact and other fragmental materials are members, whether designated or not as \u201cbreccia\u201d in the conventional literature.This is followed by a proposed rational organization (classification) of coarse fragmentites and breccias based on the regime of formation and architecture (fabric, \u201cGef\u00fcge\u201d). Two fundamental end-member sequences (a,b) and a transitional suite (c) can be recognized: (a) Disaggregation fragmentites (D-breccias), produced from a solid progenitor by increasing rate of fracturing, expansion, rotation, mixing and attrition. The transitional sequence is crackle\u2192mosaic\u2192rubble\u2192m\u00e9lange\u2192milled breccia. (b) Aggregation fragmentites (A-breccias), generated by gathering, aggregation and accumulation of originally dispersed fragments at the site of deposition. These materials form a sequence ranging from tightly packed, fragment-supported matrix-free fragmentites through matrix-infilled, matrix-supported fragmentites to lonestone rocks. (c) In-transport fragmentites (T-breccias) formed by redeposition of an aggregate gathered in an earlier phase of development as an A-fragmentite, or by transportation and redeposition of an advanced member (i.e. rubble, m\u00e9lange or milled fragmental aggregate) of a D-fragmentite. Examples of metallic mineralizations coeval with, or superimposed on the fragmentite sequences are reviewed.ViewShow abstractWoody vegetation-environment relations in a semi-arid savanna in the northern TransvaalArticleAug 1992S AFR J BOT Timothy Gordon O'ConnorThe relations between gradients in the composition and structure of the woody vegetation and environmental factors, principally substrate type, were investigated with correspondence analysis for an area of 8700ha of mopane veld in the northern Transvaal. Colophospermum mopane was present in all 269 stands sampled, and 46 woody species occurred frequently enough to be included in the analysis. The first ordination axis described a gradient from shrub woodlands with a high abundance of C. mopane on colluvial or alluvial soils or exposed calcrete, through to taller woodlands with a lower abundance of C. mopane and a greater equitability of other species, occurring on either shallow non-calcareous soils overlying gneisses or schists or on rugged terrain of diabase or marble geology. The second axis separated the different shrub C. mopane woodlands on calcrete from those on colluvial or alluvial soils. There were significant differences between substrate types in the abundance of twelve species of the twenty most common species tested.ViewShow abstractCalcrete and near-surface geology of Kuwait City and suburbs, Kuwait, Arabian GulfArticleJan 1988SEDIMENT GEOL Jawad S. Al-SulaimiNear-surface accumulation of pedogenic carbonate (calcrete) is a common and characteristic feature of the landscape of Kuwait City and its suburbs. The principal host material for these calcretes is a thick sequence of unconsolidated quartzose sand. A typical fully developed soil profile can be divided into five zones: in descending order these are (1) a top calcareous aeolian soil; (2) a zone of friable sand with powdery or tightly cemented calcrete lumps (nodules); (3) a massive calcrete zone; (4) a mottled calcrete zone; and (5) unaltered parent material. Episodic formation of calcrete is indicated by the occurrence of multiple profiles in which zones are repeated.Calcrete ooids and pseudo-ooids of accretionary origin are characteristic of the upper calcrete zone. The carbonate fraction in the upper calcrete zone consists dominantly of low-Mg calcite with minor amounts of dolomite. Replacement was a major process in formation of the massive calcrete and the dominant cementing material is largely low-Mg calcite and/or microcrystalline dolomite.Aeolian dust is considered to be the major source of ions for calcrete formation in Kuwait City and suburbs. An earlier-introduced model* is applied to explain the mechanisms of formation and precipitation of low-Mg calcite and dolomite.The calcrete thickness in the study area is explained by episodic deposition of fluviatile sand and calcrete formation during the Oligocene through Lower Miocene period.ViewShow abstractMarine and terrestrial sedimentation across the T\u2013J transition in the North German BasinArticleOct 2017PALAEOGEOGR PALAEOCL Matthias Franz Gregor Barth Carmen Heunisch Markus WolfgrammThe global Mesozoic sea-level rise contributed to the stepwise flooding of the Central European Basin (CEB) across the T-J transition and transformed the CEB from a late Triassic inland playa to an early Jurassic semi-enclosed inland sea. The calibration of sections from North Germany and Thuringia using high-resolution palynomorph and ammonite biostratigraphy contributes to the improved temporal and spatial resolution of this decisive period. The herein proposed Deltoidospora-Concavisporites (DC) Zone, placed between the Rhaetian Ricciisporites-Polypodiisporites (RP) Zone and the Hettangian Pinuspollenites-Trachysporites Zone, marks the transitional zone of overlapping Rhaetian and Hettangian palynomorphs in brackish-marine, brackish and terrestrial environments of the North German Basin (NGB). Thus, the DC Zone enables the identification of the T-J transition in the NGB. Following a short-term ingression in the late Norian Corollina-Porcellispora Subzone, the first Rhaetian transgression contributed to substantial marine-terrestrial facies shifts. The diachronous transgressive onlap of brackish-marine strata culminated in a first Rhaetian maximum flooding in the upper Corollina-Enzonalasporites Zone to lower Rhaetipollis-Limbosporites (RL) Zone. After a regressive maximum in the middle RL Zone, the next transgression culminated in a second Rhaetian maximum flooding in the upper RL Zone. Following the end-Triassic regression, herein assigned to the upper RP Zone, the diachronous transgressive onlap of marine shales marks the change to marine Jurassic environments. The herein proposed Deltoidospora-Concavisporites (DC) Zone, placed between the Rhaetian Ricciisporites-Polypodiisporites (RP) Zone and the Hettangian Pinuspollenites-Trachysporites Zone, marks the transitional zone of overlapping Rhaetian and Hettangian palynomorphs in brackish-marine, brackish and terrestrial environments of the North German Basin (NGB). Thus, the DC Zone enables the identification of the T-J transition in the NGB. At the western gate of the CEB, the onset of marine Hettangian strata with ammonites, dated as the P. erugatum Biohorizon at St. Audrie's Bay, postdates the base Hettangian GSSP by ~. 250. kyr. From there to Thuringia, the diachronous onlap of marine Hettangian strata with ammonites, herein dated as the P. plicatulum Biohorizon, took place over ~. 100. kyr. The first Jurassic maximum flooding is dated as the interval of the P. psilonotum to P. plicatulum Biohorizons (lower Planorbis Zone). Rhaetian-Hettangian 3rd-order sequences of the CEB correlate with contemporaneous sequences described from Tethyan and peri-Tethyan basins pointing to circum-Tethyan eustatic cycles. The 4th-order sequences are evident in the Rhaetian-Hettangian, but only a set of Rhaetian 4th-order sequences can be correlated in the NGB so far.ViewShow abstractShow moreThis research doesn't cite any other publications.AdJoin ResearchGate to find the people and research you need to help your work.15+ million members118+ million publications700k+ research projectsJoin for freeRecommended publicationsDiscover more publications, questions and projects in TerminologyArticleFull-text availableThe occurrence of vitrified dung from the Kamdeboo district, southern Karoo, and Den Staat, Limpopo...January 2003 \u00b7 South African Journal of ScienceJ.J.B. Dreyer Leon JacobsonJ.C. Loock[...]W.A. van der WesthuizenWE DEMONSTRATE THAT UNDER CERTAIN conditions vitrified dung as well as other biomass-derived aggregates can occur at archaeological sites throughout southern Africa. Recommendations are made about the terminology used to describe these aggregates. View full-textArticleFull-text availableInterpreting DPSH penetration values in sand soilsSeptember 2017 \u00b7 Journal of the South African Institution of Civil Engineers Charles MacRobertSite investigations to classify the underlying soil for geotechnical purposes often rely on in-situ penetrometer tests. Two common tests used in southern Africa are the Standard Penetration Test (SPT) and Dynamic Probe Super Heavy (DPSH) test. Although the specific work per blow is essentially the same in both tests, the resulting penetration values are not equivalent. The DPSH tends to be more ... [Show full abstract] variable than the SPT and has higher blow counts. A comparison of SPT and DPSH penetration values at a series of strata below sites has been undertaken. From this, new relative density descriptor boundaries, based on DPSH penetration values, are suggested for sand soils.View full-textArticleFull-text availableGeology and Mineral Ressources of the Central and Southern Africa Subcontinent, Epidodes 15 (3), 211...January 1992 \u00b7 Episodes R.T. F Lubala Mumba ChabuView full-textChapterThe Western Free State Panfield: A Landscape of Myriad Pans and LunettesMarch 2015 Peter J. HolmesThe descriptor Western Free State Panfield covers the greatest concentration of pans in southern Africa. Many Free State pans boast fringing lunette dunes on their southern and south-eastern margins. Lunettes derive their name from their sickle-moon shape, yet the environmental requirements which promote and sustain the formation of pan-lunette sequences are still not fully understood. In the ... [Show full abstract] western Free State, pans form almost exclusively on the shale substrate of the Ecca Group , suggesting a significant measure of geological control . An apparent pattern of pan orientation exists in agreement with palaeodrainage lines. This supports the notion of bedrock influence on drainage, with drainage in turn playing a direct role in pan formation . Lithological (rock type) control on the formation of pans in the western Free State is, clearly, important. This chapter describes the morphology of pans and lunettes (the two features should, arguably, not be separated) and reviews the origins of their formation. Finally, pans as a resource are examined, and their significance as a key element of the Free State landscape and a proxy for environmental change is assessed.Read moreDiscover moreDownload citationWhat type of file do you want? RIS BibTeX Plain TextWhat do you want to download? Citation only Citation and abstractDownloadLooking for the full-text?You can request the full-text of this article directly from the authors on ResearchGate.Request full-textAlready a member? Log inorDiscover by subject areaRecruit researchersJoin for freeLoginEmail Tip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inor log in withWelcome back! Please log in.Email \u00b7 HintTip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inor log in withNo account? Sign upAboutNewsCompanyCareersSupportHelp centerFAQBusiness solutionsRecruitingAdvertisingAd\u00a9 ResearchGate 2019. All rights reserved.ImprintTermsPrivacy", "Dictionary of Gardening and Plant Growing Terms and Phrases - Garden Helper, Gardening Questions and Answers TGH Welcome to The Garden Helper! The Garden Helper is a free gardening encyclopedia and guides to growing and caring for gardens, plants and flowers. Helping gardeners grow their dreams since 1997.No-dash-here, you've found The Real Garden Helper! Gardening on the Web since 1997 Basics Resources USDA Plant Zones Last Frost Dates Plants from Seed Plant Buying Guide Garden Glossary Gardening Tool Care Gardening Tools Garden Soil Garden Soil Soil Acidity Compost Fertilizer Gardening calendar January February March April May June July August September October November December Gardens Gardens Learn How to create and maintain gardens Flower Gardens Shade Gardens Vegetable Garden Raised Planting Beds Butterfly Gardens Hummingbird Garden Container Garden Water Features Plants Garden Plants Annuals Perennials Vegetables Bulb Type Plants Flowering trees Vining Plants Drought Tolerant Butterfly Flowers Hummingbird Flowers Carnivorous Plants House Plants 100 House Plants Plant Bugs Terrariums Dish Gardens Terrarium Plants Plants in Pots Plant Buying Guide Problems Problems Troubleshooting Plant Insects Good Bugs Living Christmas Cookies Gardening with Kids Forums Visit our Gardening Forum! Share your gardening knowledge with The Gardener's Forum - with 50,000 posts and thousands of participating members. Gardener's Forum Gardening Questions and Answers No-dash-here, you've found The Real Garden Helper! Gardening on the Web since 1997 The Garden Helper The Gardener's Forum Forum Archive Garden Calendar Gardening in March Gardening Basics Planting & Growing Plants by Group Garden Specific Plants House Plants Plant Buying Guide Plant Hardiness Zones Pests & Problems Start Seed Indoors Garden Tool Care Garden Glossary Plant Care Icons Plant Buying Guide Plant Index Encyclopedia Cookies! A Slightly Abridged Glossary of Gardening and Plant Terms This list of gardening terms is far from complete, but hopefully will help you to understand what the heck I'm talking about, when I use them on the gardening pages. A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z acid soil A soil with a pH lower than 7.0 is an acid soil. (a soil pH higher than 7.0 is alkaline) Basically, pH is a measure of the amount of lime (calcium) contained in your soil. acre A measure of land totaling 43,560 square feet. A square acre is 208.75 feet on each side. aerate Loosening or puncturing the soil to increase water penetration. air layering A specialized method of plant propagation accomplished by cutting into the bark of the plant to induce new roots to form. alkaline soil A soil with a pH higher than 7.0 is an alkaline soil. (a soil pH lower than 7.0 is acidic) Basically, pH is a measure of the amount of lime (calcium) contained in your soil. annuals Plants whose life cycle lasts only one year, from seed to blooms to seed. arboretum A garden with a large collection of trees and shrubs cultivated for scientific or educational purposes. aquatic plants Plants which grow in, live in, or live on the water. bare root Plants offered for sale which have had all of the soil removed from their roots. bedding plant Plants (mainly annuals), nursery grown and suitable for growing in beds. Quick, colorful flowers. biennial A plant that usually only lives two years, normally producing flowers and seed the second year. bipinnate Compound leaf structures with a feather-like formation of leaflets arranged in pairs, with each leaflet also pinnately divided into pairs. bolting Vegetables which quickly go to flower rather than producing the food crop. Usually caused by late planting and too warm temperatures. bonsai The art of growing carefully trained, dwarf plants in containers. botanical name The scientific name of a plant, usually composed of two words,the genus and the species. bract Modified scale-like leaves, usually growing just below a flower or flower cluster. Often confused with petals or the flower itself, as in the case of Dogwoods or Poinsettias. bud Early stages of development of a flower or plant growth. bulb The thickened underground storage organ of the group of perennials which includes daffodils and tulips. cambium The thin membrane located just beneath the bark of a plant. catkin A slender, spikelike, drooping flower cluster. chlorophyll The green pigment in leaves. When present and healthy usually dominates all other pigments. cladode A flattened stem or branch with green tissue scales that replace the function of leaves in performing the process of photosynthesis. Many plants with cladodes have no true leaves at all and if they do the leaves are miniscule and short lived. complete fertilizer A plant food which contains all three of the primary elements... nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium. compost An organic soil amendment resulting from the decomposition of organic matter. conifer A cone bearing tree with tiny needlelike leaves. corm A thickened underground stem which produces roots, leaves and flowers during the growing season. cover crop A crop which is planted in the absence of the normal crop to control weeds and add humus to the soil when it is plowed in prior to regular planting. crown The point at which a plants roots and top join. (usually at soil level) cultivate Process of breaking up the soil surface, removing weeds, and preparing for planting. cuttings A method of propagation using sections of stems, roots or leaves. damping off A fungus, usually affecting seedlings and causes the stem to rot off at soil level. It can also rot seeds before they even germinate. Sterilized seed starting mixes and careful sanitation practices can usually prevent this. Use care not to over-water. Provide good air circulation. deadheading The process of pinching or snipping off used or spent blooms to keep the plants well groomed and to prevent them from setting seed. This will promote continued bloom. dibble stick A pointed tool used to make holes in the soil for seeds, bulbs, or young plants. dethatch Process of removing dead stems that build up beneath lawn grasses. dioecious plant Plants bear male flowers on one plant and female flowers on another. In order to produce fruit and viable seeds, both a female and male plant must be present dividing The process of splitting up plants, roots and all that have began to get bound together. This will make several plants from one plant, and usually should be done to mature perennials every 3 to 4 years. dormancy The yearly cycle in a plants life when growth slows and the plant rests. Fertilizing should be withheld when a plant is in dormancy. double digging Preparing the soil by systematically digging an area to the depth of two shovels. double flower A flower with many overlapping petals which gives it a very full appearance. drip line The circle which would exist if you drew a line below the tips of the outer most branches of a tree or plant. epiphyte A plant which grows on another plant but gets its nourishment from the air and rainfall. They do no damage to the host plant. erosion The wearing away, washing away, or removal of soil by wind, water or man. espalier The process of training a tree or shrub so that its branches grow in a flat, exposed pattern by tying, pinching and pruning the branches. evergreen A plant which never loses all of it's leaves at one time. eye An undeveloped bud growth which will ultimately produce new growth. evaporation Process by which water returns to the air. Higher temperatures speed the process of evaporation. fertilizer Organic or inorganic plant foods which may be either liquid or granular used to amend the soil in order to improve the quality or quantity of plant growth. flat A shallow box or tray used to start cuttings or seedlings. floating row cover A lightweight fabric that is spread or floated over a row of plants to trap heat during the day and release it at night. Use them to get a jump start in the spring, fend off pests, and extend your fall growing season. foliar feeding Fertilizer applied in liquid form to the plants foliage in a fine spray. forcing The process of hastening a plants growth to maturity or bloom. frond The term used to describe the branch and leaf structure of a fern or members of the palm family. frost The condensation and freezing of moisture in the air. Tender plants will suffer extensive damage or die when exposed to frost. germinate The process that transforms the embryo within a seed into a seedling. girdling The choking of a branch by a wire or other material, most often in the stems of woody plants that have been tied to tightly to a stake or support. grafting The uniting of a short length of stem of one plant onto the root stock of a different plant. This is often done to produce a hardier or more disease resistant plant. ground cover A group of plants usually used to cover bare earth and create a uniform appearance. growing season The number of days between the average date of the last killing frost in spring and the first killing frost in fall. Vegetables and certain plants require a minimum number of days to reach maturity, so be sure your growing season is long enough. harden off The process of gradually acclimatizing greenhouse or indoor grown plants in stages to different temperatures or to outdoor growing conditions. hardpan The impervious layer of soil or clay lying beneath the topsoil. hardiness The ability of a plant to withstand low temperatures or frost, without artificial protection. heading back Cutting an older branch or stem back to a stub or twig. heeling in Temporarily setting a plant into a shallow trench and covering the roots with soil to provide protection until it is ready to be permanently planted. herbaceous Describes a plant with soft rather than woody tissues. honeydew The sticky secretion produced by sucking insects such as aphids. humus The brown or black organic part of the soil resulting from the partial decay of leaves and other matter. hybrid The offspring of two plants of different species or varieties of plants. Hybrids are created when the pollen from one kind of plant is used to pollinate and entirely different variety, resulting in a new plant altogether. hydroponics The science of growing plants in mineral solutions or liquid, instead of in soil. inflorescence The structure that carry the flowers on a plant. J K lath In gardening, an overhead structure of evenly spaced slats of wood or other materials used to create shade. layering A method of propagation, by which a branch of a plant is rooted while still attached to the plant by securing it to the soil with a piece of wire or other means.. leaching The removal or loss of excess salts or nutrients from soil. The soil around over fertilized plants can be leached clean by large quantities of fresh water used to 'wash' the soil. Areas of extremely high rainfall sometimes lose the nutrients from the soil by natural leaching. leaf mold Partially decomposed leaf matter, used as a soil amendment. loam A rich soil composed of clay, sand, and organic matter. manure Hmmmm...... Organic matter, excreted by animals, which is used as a soil amendment and fertilizer. Green manures are plant cover crops which are tilled into the soil. microclimate Variations of the climate within a given area, usually influenced by hills, hollows, structures or proximity to bodies of water. (i.e. when it's raining at your house, and the sun is shining on the other side of the street) micro nutrients Mineral elements which are needed by some plants in very small quantities. If the plants you are growing require specific 'trace elements' and they are not available in the soil, they must be added. monoecious plant Plants bearing separate male and female flowers on the same plant mulch Any loose material placed over the soil to control weeds and conserve soil moisture. Usually this is a coarse organic matter, such as leaves, clippings or bark, but plastic sheeting and other commercial products can also be used. native plant Any plant that occurs and grows naturally in a specific region or locality. naturalize To plant randomly, without a pattern. The idea is to create the effect that the plants grew in that space without man's help, such as you would find wild flowers growing. node The point on a stem where one or more leaves, branches or flowers start to grow. organic gardening The method of gardening utilizing only materials derived from living things. (i.e. composts and manures) organic material Any material which originated as a living organism. (i.e. peat moss, compost, manure) palmate Shaped like a hand, with segments radiating from a central point, like fingers panicle A loose, airy, multi-branched cluster of flowers parasitic plant A plant which lives on, and acquires it's nutrients from another plant. This often results in declined vigor or death of the host plant. peat moss The partially decomposed remains of various mosses. This is a good, water retentive addition to the soil, but tends to add the acidity of the soil pH. perennial A non-woody plant which grows and lives for more than two years. Perennials usually produce one flower crop each year, lasting anywhere from a week to a month or longer. perlite A mineral, which when expanded by a heating process forms light granuals. Perlite is a good addition to container potting mixes, to promote moisture retention while allowing good drainage. pest Any insect or animal which is detrimental to the health and well being of plants or other animals. photosynthesis The internal process by which a plant turns sunlight into growing energy. The formation of carbohydrates in plants from water and carbon dioxide, by the action of sunlight on the Chlorophyll within the leaves. pinching back Utilizing the thumb and forefinger to nip back the very tip of a branch or stem. Pinching promotes branching, and a bushier, fuller plant pinnate A compound leaf structure with a feather-like formation of leaflets arranged in pairs or alternating along the main stem. pistil The seed-bearing organ of a flower, consisting of the ovary, stigma, and style. pollination The transfer of pollen from the stamen (male part of the flower) to the pistil (female part of the flower), which results in the formation of a seed. Hybrids are created when the pollen from one kind of plant is used to pollinate and entirely different variety, resulting in a new plant altogether. potting soil A soil mixture designed for use in container gardens and potted plants. Potting mixes should be loose, light, and sterile. propagation Various methods of starting new plants ranging from starting seeds to identical clones created by cuttings or layering. pruning The cutting and trimming of plants to remove dead or injured wood, or to control and direct the new growth of a plant. pH Basically, pH is a measure of the amount of lime (calcium) contained in your soil. A soil with a pH lower than 7.0 is an acid soil, a soil pH higher than 7.0 is alkaline soil. Soil pH can be tested with an inexpensive test kit. Q raceme A single stemmed inflorescence with flowers on individual stalks along a stem. The bottom flowers open first as the raceme continues to elongate. Snapdragon and Delphinium flowers grow on racemes. rhizome A modified plant stem which grows horizontally, under the surface of the soil. New growth then emerges from different points of the rhizome. Irises and some lawn grasses are rhizome plants. root ball The network of roots along with the attached soil, of any given plant. rootbound A condition which exists when a potted plant has outgrown its container. The roots become entangled and matted together, and the growth of the plant becomes stunted. When repotting, loosen the roots on the outer edges of the root ball, to induce them to once again grow outward. rooting hormone A powder or liquid growth hormone, used to stimulate a plant cutting to send out new roots from a stem node. rosette A cluster of leaves or flowers forming a compact, circular arrangement runner A slender stem growing out from the base of some plants, which terminates with a new offset plant. The new plant may be severed from the parent after it has developed sufficient roots. relative humidity The measurement of the amount of moisture in the atmosphere. scarification Scratching or nicking of a seed's shell to facilitate germination. scion A short length of stem, taken from one plant which is then grafted onto the rootstock of another plant. single flower A flower having only a minimum number of petals for that variety of plant. soil pH Basically, pH is a measure of the amount of lime (calcium) contained in your soil. A soil with a pH lower than 7.0 is an acid soil, a soil pH higher than 7.0 is alkaline soil. Soil pH can be tested with an inexpensive test kit. sphagnum A bog moss which is collected and composted. Most peat moss is composed primarily of sphagnum moss. This moss is also packaged and sold in a fresh state, and used for lining hanging baskets and air layering. spore Spores are the reproductive cell structure of ferns, fungi and mosses. Fern spores develop inside small green capsules on the underside of the fronds, called sporangia. These types of plants do not form flowers nor produce seeds. staking The practice of driving a stake into the ground next to, and as a support for a plant. When attaching the plant to the stake, be sure that it is tied loosely so it doesn't strangle the stem. When staking a potted plant, the stake should be set into the planter before the plant is added. stolon An above ground spreading stem or runner that often produces a new plant at the tip. (example: Strawberry plants) stratification A process used to break the dormancy of a seed. This usually requires that the seeds be placed in a moistened rooting medium and kept in the refrigerator or freezer for a designated length of time sucker A growth originating from the rootstock of a grafted plant, rather than the desired part of the plant. Sucker growth should be removed, so it doesn't draw energy from the plant. systemic A chemical which is absorbed directly into a plants system to either kill feeding insects on the plant, or to kill the plant itself. tap root The main, thick root growing straight down from a plant. (not all plants have tap roots) tender plants Plants which are unable to endure frost or freezing temperatures. tendril The twisting, clinging, slender growth on many vines, which allows the plant to attach themselves to a support or trellis. thatch The layer of dead stems that builds up under many lawn grasses. Thatch should be removed periodically to promote better water and nutrient penetration into the soil. thinning Removing excess seedlings, to allow sufficient room for the remaining plants to grow. Thinning also refers to removing entire branches from a tree or shrub, to give the plant a more open structure. top-dress To evenly spread fertilizers or other soil amendments over the surface of the soil. topiary A method of pruning and training certain plants into formal shapes such as animals. topsoil The top layer of native soil. This term may also apply to good quality soil sold at nurseries and garden centers. transpiration The release of moisture through the leaves of a plant. transplanting The process of digging up a plant and moving it to another location. tuber A flat underground stem which stores food and plant energy and from which a plant grows. (e.g. Dahlias) umbel A mostly flat topped flower cluster in which individual flower stems radiate from a common point, like the ribs of an umbrella. variegated Leaves which are marked with multiple colors. vermiculite A sterile soil amendment created when the mineral 'mica' has been heated to the point of expansion, like popcorn. A good addition to container potting mixes, vermiculite retains moisture and air within the soil. XYZ Other articles you might like: \u00a9 1997-2019 TheGardenHelper.com | Page Index The Garden Helper may not be reproduced or distributed for any purpose without our written consent.", "Pavement Design in Seasonal Frost Conditions PDH Show Cart Cart empty Please wait Fast, Easy and Affordable PDH Continuing Education for Engineers! Our Amazing Sales & Support: 888-479-4574 MENU Course CatalogState PDH RequirementsFAQMy Account LoginMy ProfileMy Orders/CoursesMy QuizzesMy ResultsAccount MaintenanceAbout UsContact UsCart Pavement Design in Seasonal Frost Conditions - 5 PDH Back to: Civil Engineering This publication presents criteria and procedures for the design and construction of pavements placed on subgrade or base course materials subject to seasonal frost action. The most prevalent modes of distress in pavements and their causes are listed. The detrimental effects of frost action in subsurface materials are manifested by nonuniform heave of pavements during the winter and by loss of strength of affected soils during the ensuing thaw period. This is accompanied by a corresponding increase in damage accumulation and a more rapid rate of pavement deterioration during the period of weakening; other related detrimental effects of frost and low temperatures are possible loss of compaction, development of permanent roughness, restriction of drainage by the frozen strata, and cracking and deterioration of the pavement surface. Hazardous operating conditions, excessive maintenance, or pavement destruction may result. Base price with tax: Salesprice with discount: $89.95Discount: Tax amount: Price / kg: Download pavement_design_in_seasonal_frost_conditions_fe_na.pdf Price: No additional charge Instant Download! Manufacturer: Guyer Description Reviews Course Outline 1. General 2. Definitions 3. Frost-Susceptibility Classification 4. Alternative Methods of Thickness Design 5. Selection of Design Method 6. Limited Subgrade Frost Penetration 7. Reduced Subgrade Strength 8. Use of State Highway Requirements 9. Free-Draining Material Directly Beneath Bound Base or Surfacing Layer 10. Other Granular Unbound Base CoursE 11. Use of Fl and F2 Soils for Base Materials 12. Filter or Drainage Requirements 13. Stabilizers and Stabilized Layers 14. Stabilization with Lime and with LCF 15. STABILIZATION WITH PORTLAND CEMENT 16. Stabilization With Bitumen 17. Subgrade Requirements 18. Other Measures to Reduce Heave 19. Pavement Cracking Associated with Frost Heave 20. Control of Subgrade and Base Course Construction 21. Base Course Construction 22. Compaction 23. Use of Insulation Materials in Pavements Learning Objectives Upon completion of this course you will: Learn frost, soil and pavement terminology applicable to design for seasonal frost conditions; Learn about bound bases and how they are employed in frost conditions; Learn the definitions of frost-susceptible soils; Learn how the design freezing index is determined and applied in design for seasonal frost; Learn how to design to accommodate varved clays; Learn the alternative methods of thickness design; Learn how to determine and apply the air freezing index; Learn about the reduced subgrade strength design method. Intended Audience This course is intended for civil and geotechnical engineers and other design and construction professionals wanting to learn how to design rigid and flexible pavements where seasonal frost conditions exist. Benefit for Attendee This course will give design and construction professionals an introduction to special design methods to employ when designing pavements for roads, parking and open storage areas where climatic conditions include seasonal frost. Course Introduction This course provides introductory information about evaluation of soil conditions, selection of materials, and design methods for pavements in seasonal frost conditions. Course Summary This course will give you professional tools that will help you to understand the special technical and design considerations to use in pavement design in cold regions where frost conditions are a factor. Reviews There are yet no reviews for this product. Passive Solar Buildings - 3 PDHPavement Overlays - 3 PDH Login Form After logging in you will stay logged in for 6 hours. If you encounter any page asking you to login during that time please use the ctrl+refresh trick we explain below the login form to see the actual page. :-) User Name Password Remember Me Forgot your password? Forgot your username? Create an account If you see \"invalid token\" please hold down ctrl on your keyboard and click the refresh button (an arrow going in a circle two buttons to the right of your \"back\" button). I chose your company because of the price, and I'm certainly happy with that! \u00a0I am thankful that there is Continuing Education that is so affordable. \u00a0Thanks for responding! Rebecca Thank you very much. Appreciate your prompt response. Have a great day. Linda Wow, an email from a real person and not a pre-written response. \u00a0That is very refreshing. \u00a0I will be sure to recommend this site to others in my field! Sharon Our PDH is currently accepted in: AL, AK, AZ, AR, CA, CO, CT, DE, GA, HI, ID, IL, IN, IA, KS, KY, LA, ME, MA, MI, MN, MS, MO, MT, NE, NV, NH, NM, ND, OH, OK, OR, PA, RI, SC, SD, TN, TX, UT, VT, VA, WA, WV, WI, WY", "Growing season | agriculture | Britannica.com ENCYCLOP\u00c6DIA BRITANNICA START YOUR FREE TRIAL Log In \u00b7 Join Demystified Quizzes Galleries Lists On This Day Biographies 100 Women START YOUR FREE TRIAL Search Britannica What are you looking for? Search Click here to search Browse popular topics: Martin Luther King, Jr. William Shakespeare Saint Patrick's Day St. Patrick Shamrock Bring fact-checked results to the top of your browser search. Learn More. Growing season agriculture Written By: The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica See Article History Alternative Title: frost-free season Growing season, also called Frost-free Season, period of the year during which growing conditions for indigenous vegetation and cultivated crops are most favourable. It usually becomes shorter as distance from the Equator increases. In equatorial and tropical regions the growing season ordinarily lasts all year, whereas in higher latitudes, e.g., the tundra, it may last as little as two months or less. Growing season also varies according to elevation above sea level, with higher elevations tending to have shorter growing seasons.Length of growing season is measured in two ways. One enumerates the days of the year when average temperature is above the threshold at which crops will germinate and continue to grow (along with native vegetation). This measure varies with kind of crop. For example, wheat and many other plants require an average temperature of at least 40\u00b0 F (5\u00b0 C) to germinate. Others, such as corn (maize) have a threshold of germination of 50\u00b0 F (10\u00b0 C); rice has an even higher threshold, about 68\u00b0 F (20\u00b0 C). Ordinarily in the temperate zones average temperatures exceed the threshold during most of the growing season\u2014which begins when the threshold is reached in spring and ends when temperatures drop below it. Plants require average temperatures to exceed the threshold during most of the season in order to mature rapidly. Where latitude or elevation keeps average temperatures at or near the threshold all season long, plants ripen more slowly and do not develop as fully as they will do in more compatible temperatures.The other mode of measurement for growing seasons is stated in terms of frost-free days, i.e. the average number of days between the last frost of spring and the first killing frost of fall or winter. Most agriculture requires a frost-free season of at least about 90 days. Some areas of temperate zone countries, such as mountainous areas, have fewer than 90-day frost-free seasons, and this is also true of subarctic regions. Such areas are restricted to crops that can germinate and mature within their shorter seasons. However, in these higher latitudes the greatly increased duration of daylight in summer compensates significantly for shorter frost-free seasons. Other areas within the temperate zones, where warm oceanic or air currents greatly prolong high average temperatures, may have 240 or more frost-free days each year. Learn More in these related Britannica articles: Nevada: Climate \u2026up by variations in the growing season: Las Vegas has about 240 days in its growing season, Reno about 155, and Elko only about 100.\u2026 frost \u2026of the length of the growing season: the period from the last killing frost in spring to the first killing frost in autumn, with reference to the tenderest crop plants. There are regions where the season reaches critically short duration for the maturing of most usable crops and others where\u2026 Origins of agriculture Origins of agriculture, the active production of useful plants or animals in ecosystems that have been created by people. Agriculture has often been conceptualized narrowly, in terms of specific combinations of activities and organisms\u2014wet-rice production in Asia, wheat farming in Europe, cattle\u2026 Agricultural technology Agricultural technology, application of techniques to control the growth and harvesting of animal and vegetable products. Mechanical processing of soil so that it is in the proper physical condition for planting is usually referred to as tilling; adding nutrients and trace elements is called\u2026 Domestication Domestication, the process of hereditary reorganization of wild animals and plants into domestic and cultivated forms according to the interests of people. In its strictest sense, it refers to the initial stage of human mastery of wild animals and plants. The fundamental distinction of domesticated\u2026 History at your fingertips Sign up here to see what happened On This Day, every day in your inbox! By signing up, you agree to our Privacy Policy. Thank you for subscribing! Be on the lookout for your Britannica newsletter to get trusted stories delivered right to your inbox. More About Growing season2 references found in Britannica articlesAssorted Referenceseffects of frost In frostNevada In Nevada: Climate Feedback Corrections? Updates? Help us improve this article! Contact our editors with your feedback. Growing season Quick Facts related topicsCrop production Related Topics Origins of agriculture Agricultural technology Domestication Biosphere Forestry Gardening Horticulture Irrigation and drainage Arboriculture Propagation Edit Mode Growing season Agriculture Tips for Editing Leave Edit Mode Submit Tips For Editing We welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. You can make it easier for us to review and, hopefully, publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind. Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience. You may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered. Any text you add should be original, not copied from other sources. At the bottom of the article, feel free to list any sources that support your changes, so that we can fully understand their context. (Internet URLs are the best.) Your contribution may be further edited by our staff, and its publication is subject to our final approval. Unfortunately, our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions. Submit Thank You for Your Contribution! Our editors will review what you've submitted, and if it meets our criteria, we'll add it to the article. Please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors, and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed. Uh Oh There was a problem with your submission. Please try again later. Close Growing season Additional Information Article History Article Contributors Keep Exploring Britannica Artificial intelligence Artificial intelligence (AI), the ability of a digital computer or computer-controlled robot to perform\u2026 Read this Article Petroleum Petroleum, complex mixture of hydrocarbons that occur in Earth in liquid, gaseous, or solid form. The\u2026 Read this Article Television Television (TV), the electronic delivery of moving images and sound from a source to a receiver. By extending\u2026 Read this Article View More Stay Connected Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Pinterest Newsletters About Us About Our Ads Partner Program Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use \u00a92019 Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica, Inc. Menu Home Demystified Quizzes Galleries Lists On This Day Biographies 100 Women Login Join Growing season agriculture Info Print Cite Share SHARE Facebook Twitter Feedback Feedback Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login). Select feedback type: Select a type (Required) Factual Correction Spelling/Grammar Correction Link Correction Additional Information Other Submit Feedback If you prefer to suggest your own revision of the article, you can go to edit mode (requires login). Thank you for your feedback Our editors will review what you\u2019ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. Join Britannica's Publishing Partner Program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work! Share SHARE Facebook Twitter Search \u00d7 close Britannica Celebrates 100 Women Trailblazers", "Terminology Home Download PDF Order CD-ROM Order in Print Home > United Facilities Criteria CD 1 > > Terminology Chapter 9 Pavement Materials Mechanisms Pavement Design for Airfields - indexPage Navigation\u00a0\u00a066\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a067\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a068\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a069\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a070\u00a0\u00a071\u00a0\u00a072\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a073\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a074\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a075\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a076 UFC 3-260-02 30 June 2001 stabilization results in granular layers sandwiched between relatively impervious layers (e.g., granular base course between an asphalt concrete surface and a stabilized subbase), then this pervious intermediate layer should be positively drained. Because of the potential for poor performance of such geometries, such designs must be approved before use by HQUSACE (CEMP-ET), appropriate Air Force MAJCOM pavements engineer, or Naval Facilities Engineering Service Center. c. Terminology. The term \"stabilization\" as used in this chapter will encompass the addition of any materials to a soil or aggregate to improve its strength or physical characteristics for use as pavement subgrade, fill, subbase, or base course. As employed here, the term will include combinations with common additives such as lime and portland cement or lime-portland cement-fly ash as well as those materials often referred to as soil-cement, lean concrete base, econocrete, etc. TM 5-822-14/AFJMAN 32-1019 differentiates between soil stabilization and soil modification where the later only results in an improvement in some property but does not by design cause a significant increase in strength. This level of differentiation is not needed for the generalized discussion of the topic in this chapter, so stabilization is used here as an all-inclusive term. d. Seasonal Frost Areas. Use of stabilized materials in areas subject to seasonal frost must address two extra concerns. First, the stabilized material must be durable for its intended purpose under the freezing and thawing exposure to which it will be exposed. Secondly, many stabilizers (e.g., portland cement or lime) must cure to gain strength, and the necessary chemical reactions to gain strength are greatly retarded and may cease altogether at low temperatures. Consequently, some stabilized materials placed late in the fall may not be able to gain adequate strength prior to the onset of freezing weather. Consequently, local climatic conditions will determine a cutoff date well in advance of anticipated freezing conditions after which date it is not prudent to place stabilized materials. Additional assistance on problems with stabilized materials under seasonal frost exposure is available from the Army Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory, 72 Lyme Road, Hanover, NH 03755. e. Combinations of Stabilizers. Under some circumstances, it may be desirable to use combinations of stabilizers to take advantage of each stabilizer's characteristics (e.g., use of a combination of lime and then portland cement relying on the lime to improve a plastic clay's workability and the portland cement for more rapid strength gain than available from the slower pozzolanic reactions of lime alone). f. Mixing. The stabilizer and soil or aggregate to be stabilized may be mixed in situ or mixed at a central plant and then transported to the construction site and placed according to the project specifications. Proper mixing is crucial to stabilizers achieving their desired purpose. Central plants provide the best and most consistent product. In situ mixing may vary from repeated working with a grader to highly sophisticated mixers specifically designed for the task. It is harder to achieve good distribution and mixing of the stabilizer with in situ mixing techniques than with plant mixing. Consequently, stabilizer contents are sometimes increased to 1 percent over the laboratory determined design stabilizer content to account for uncertainties of in situ mixing. g. Compaction. Stabilized materials must be adequately compacted to achieve their desired purpose. Stabilization is not a substitute for compaction, and poorly compacted stabilized layers are prone to premature failure. Essentially, the compaction equipment and procedures and the quality- control techniques used with conventional earthwork are adequate for stabilized materials. Compaction equipment of sufficient size is needed, and lift thicknesses should be restricted to a maximum of 150 millimeters (6 inches) unless the contractor can demonstrate in the field that project specified density levels are achieved throughout the lift for thicker placements. To check the latter, the density must be measured in the bottom of the lift and not just at the surface or as an average through the entire 9-2 Previous PageIndex Next Page Privacy Statement Press Release Contact \u00a9 Copyright Integrated Publishing, Inc.. All Rights Reserved. Design by Strategico. Integrated Publishing, Inc. Google +", "Pavement Design in Seasonal Frost Conditions - PE Continuing Education Welcome, Guest! Shopping Cart (0)Your shopping cart is empty. Shopping Cart (0) / Log in / Register An Online Continuing Education Provider for Professional Engineers info@cedengineering.com 1-877-322-5800 MENU Home Course Library PDH Online Courses PDH Discount Packages Ethics, Laws and Rules PDH Video Presentations PDH Live Webinars Benefit Programs Free 1 PDH Course CED Monthly Subscription Corporate Enrollment Programs PE Referral Course Provider Referral New Users How It Works User Registration State Requirements 100% Satisfaction Guarantee FAQ About Us Corporate Profile Approved Sponsor Accepted Courses Course Provider Biographies Contact Us Course Providers Course Provider Registration Course Provider Qualifications How to Provide a Course Course Provider Earnings Course Provider Search Online Courses Alt./Ren. EnergyBiomass FuelsHydro PowerRenewable SourcesSolar EnergyWind EnergyBuilding DesignAcousticsADA RequirementsAssessment and PlanningBuilding Design FundamentalsFacility DesignBusiness SkillsBusiness PlanningConflict ResolutionFinance and EconomicsManagement and LeadershipMarketing and CommunicationPerformance and ProductivityPublic InfluenceSelf DevelopmentChemical EngineeringChemical FundamentalsCooling Water TreatmentDisinfection SystemsIndustrial Water TreatmentWastewater CollectionWastewater TreatmentWater DesalinationWater TreatmentCivil EngineeringArea DrainageConcreteErosion ControlHydrologyPavement DesignSite DevelopmentStormwater ManagementWater SupplyElectrical EngineeringAC/DC CurrentsCircuit MeasurementsCommunication SystemsControl SystemsElectrical DistributionElectrical EquipmentElectrical FundamentalsElectrical SubstationsMotors and GeneratorsProtection SystemsVoltage RegulationEngineering ManagementContract AdministrationMaintenance ManagementPlant ManagementProject ManagementReliability ManagementValue EngineeringEnvironmental EngineeringAir PollutionBuilding ContaminantsEnvironmental ImpactsHazardous WasteIndoor Environmental QualitySite Remediation/ProtectionSolid WasteEthics, Laws and RulesEngineering CatastrophiesEthics: GeneralEthics: State SpecificPatentsGeotechnical EngineeringDamsDeep FoundationsEarthworkGeosyntheticsRetaining StructuresRock MechanicsShallow FoundationsSlope StabilitySoil MechanicsSpecial ConditionsHVAC EngineeringDuctworkHVAC ApplicationsHVAC DistributionHVAC for FacilitiesHVAC FundamentalsHVAC Systems and EquipmentVentilationIndustrial EngineeringIndustrial SystemsNuclear SystemsPower PlantsSpecific IndustriesSteam SystemsWeldingMaterial EngineeringCathodic ProtectionCoating and LubricationMaterial ApplicationsMaterial PropertiesThermal InsulationVapor Barrier/Roof SystemsMechanical EngineeringAutomotiveCompressed Air SystemsFire ProtectionGears and BearingsHydraulicsMechanical FundamentalsPiping SystemsPlumbing SystemsPumping SystemsSystems and EquipmentThermodynamicsVibration ControlPetroleum EngineeringOil and GasUnderground Storage TanksSafety and HealthCBR ProtectionChemical HazardsElectrical HazardsExcavation SafetyFall ProtectionSafety FundamentalsStructural EngineeringBridge InspectionsBridge MaintenanceBridge MechanicsCulvertsFlood ConstructionHigh-Wind ConstructionSeismic ConstructionStructural AnalysisTunnelsWoodSustainable DesignEnergy Efficient LaboratoriesEnergy ManagementGreen Roofs and ExteriorsHigh Performance BuildingsHVAC System ImprovementsLighting AssessmentsMEP Energy SavingsTransportation EngineeringLane Use ManagementRoadway DesignRoundabout DesignTraffic ControlTraffic SignalsTransportation Safety Discount Packages State SpecificAlabamaAlaskaArkansasDelawareFloridaGeorgiaIdahoIllinoisIndianaIowaKansasKentuckyLouisianaMaineMarylandMichiganMinnesotaMississippiMissouriMontanaNebraskaNevadaNew HampshireNew JerseyNew MexicoNew YorkNorth CarolinaNorth DakotaOhioOklahomaOregonPennsylvaniaSouth CarolinaSouth DakotaTennesseeTexas UtahVermontVirginiaWest VirginiaWisconsinWyomingGeneral PackagesAlt./Ren. EnergyBuilding DesignChemical EngineeringCivil EngineeringConstruction SafetyElectrical EngineeringEnvironmental EngineeringGeotechnical EngineeringHVAC EngineeringHydrology/HydraulicsMaterials EngineeringMechanical EngineeringPetroleum EngineeringStormwater EngineeringStructural EngineeringTransportation EngineeringWastewater Engineering Ethics, Laws and Rules Engineering CatastrophiesEthics: GeneralEthics: State SpecificPatents Live Webinars All WebinarsAlt./Ren. EnergyCivil EngineeringElectrical EngineeringEngineering ManagementEnvironmental EngineeringEthics, Laws and RulesIndustrial EngineeringMechanical EngineeringOil and GasTransportation Engineering Video Presentations Alt./Ren. EnergyChemical EngineeringCivil EngineeringElectrical EngineeringEnvironmental EngineeringEthics, Laws and RulesGeotechnical EngineeringHVAC EngineeringIndustrial EngineeringMaterial EngineeringMechanical EngineeringPetroleum EngineeringSustainable Design Courses by Provider CED Monthly Subscribe and get 20% off Your name: Your e-mail: www.cedengineering.com > Course Library > PDH Online Courses > Course PageAn Introduction to Pavement Design in Seasonal Frost ConditionsCOURSE NO: C04-029PDH CREDIT: 4COURSE PROVIDER: Paul Guyer, P.E., R.A., Fellow A ...PRICE: $96 (Save on this price with Pre-Pay-PDH Discounts!) Accepted in:AlabamaAlaskaArkansasDelawareFloridaGeorgiaIdahoIllinoisIndianaIowaKansasKentuckyLouisianaMaineMarylandMichiganMinnesotaMississippiMissouriMontanaNebraskaNevadaNew HampshireNew JerseyNew MexicoNew YorkNorth CarolinaNorth DakotaOhioOklahomaOregonPennsylvaniaSouth CarolinaSouth DakotaTennesseeTexas UtahVermontVirginiaWest VirginiaWisconsinWyomingCourse HighlightsThis\u00a0online engineering PDH course provides introductory information about evaluation of soil conditions, selection of materials, and design methods for pavements in seasonal frost conditions. It presents criteria and procedures for the design and construction of pavements placed on subgrade or base course materials subject to seasonal frost action. The most prevalent modes of distress in pavements and their causes are listed. The detrimental effects of frost action in subsurface materials are manifested by non-uniform heave of pavements during the winter and by loss of strength of affected soils during the ensuing thaw period. This is accompanied by a corresponding increase in damage accumulation and a more rapid rate of pavement deterioration during the period of weakening; other related detrimental effects of frost and low temperatures are possible loss of compaction, development of permanent roughness, restriction of drainage by the frozen strata, and cracking and deterioration of the pavement surface. Hazardous operating conditions, excessive maintenance, or pavement destruction may result. This 4 PDH online course is intended for civil and geotechnical engineers and other design and construction professionals wanting to learn how to design rigid and flexible pavements where seasonal frost conditions exist. Learning ObjectivesThis PE continuing education course is intended to provide you with the following specific knowledge and skills: Learning about frost, soil and pavement terminology applicable to seasonal frost design conditions Learning about bound bases and how they are employed in frost conditions Knowing the definitions of frost-susceptible soils Understanding how the design freezing index is determined and applied in design for seasonal frost Knowing how to design to accommodate varved clays Learning about the alternative methods of thickness design Knowing how to determine and apply the air freezing index Learning about the reduced subgrade strength design method Course DocumentIn this professional engineering CEU course, you need to review the course document titled, \"An Introduction to Pavement Design in Seasonal Frost Conditions\". To view, print and study the course document, please click on the following link(s):An Introduction to Pavement Design in Seasonal Frost Conditions (2.65 MB)Course QuizOnce\u00a0you complete your course review, you need to take a multiple-choice quiz consisting of twenty five (25) questions to earn 4 PDH credits. The quiz will be based on the entire document. The minimum passing score is 70%. There is no time limit on the quiz, and you can take it multiple times until you pass at no additional cost.Certificate of CompletionUpon successful completion of the quiz, print your Certificate of Completion instantly. (Note: if you are paying by check or money order, you may print your Certificate of Completion after we receive your payment.) For your convenience, we will also email you your Certificate of Completion. Also, you can log in to your account at any time to access and print your Certificate of Completion. To buy the course and take the quiz, please click on: Course Library PDH Online Courses PDH Discount Packages Ethics, Laws and Rules PDH Video Presentations PDH Live Webinars Benefit Programs Free 1 PDH Course CED Monthly Subscription Corporate Enrollment Programs PE Referral Course Provider Referral New Users How It Works User Registration State Requirements 100% Satisfaction Guarantee FAQ About Us Corporate Profile Approved Sponsor Accepted Courses Course Provider Biographies Contact Us Course Providers Course Provider Registration Course Provider Qualifications How to Provide a Course Course Provider Earnings Course Provider Search Privacy Policy Terms of Use Sitemap Contact Us \u00a9 2019 Continuing Education & Development, Inc. 9 Greyridge Farm Court, Stony Point, NY 10980 Tel: (877) 322-5800 | Fax: (877) 322-4774", "Chapter 7 (continued) - NHI-05-037 - Geotech - Bridges & Structures - Federal Highway Administration U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Highway Administration 1200 New Jersey Avenue, SEWashington, DC 20590 202-366-4000 About Programs Resources Briefing Room Contact Search FHWA Bridges & Structures Structures Geotech Hydraulics Safety and Management Earth and Rock Works Earth Retaining Structures Geohazards Ground Improvement Structural Foundations Subsurface Investigation Home / Programs / Bridges & Structures / Geotech / NHI-05-037 / Chapter 7 (continued) << PreviousContentsNext >> Geotechnical Aspects of Pavements Reference Manual Chapter 7.0 Design Details And Construction Conditions Requiring Special Design Attention (continued) 7.5 Subgrade Conditions Requiring Special Design Attention Considering variables such as soil type or mineralogy along a length of roadway, the geology (soil genesis and deposition method) and groundwater and flow properties make each project unique with respect to subgrade conditions. It is not surprising that certain conditions will exist that are not conducive to support, or even construction, of pavement systems. This section provides an overview of subgrade conditions that require special design attention. These subsurface conditions are often regional in nature and have usually been identified as problematic by the agency. Several foundation problems, such as collapsible or highly compressible soils, expansive or swelling soils, subsurface water and saturated soils, and frost-susceptible soils, occur extensively across the U.S. and are not specific to one region. For example, frost heave occurs in over half of the states in the U.S. and damage may be most severe in the central states, where many more frost cycles occur than in the most-northern states. Identification of these widely variable problematic subgrade conditions are also reviewed in this section, along with design and construction alternatives to achieve an adequate foundation on which to build the pavement structure. Most of the subgrade conditions presented in this section can be anticipated through a complete exploration program, as described in Chapter 4, and mitigated or at least minimized via well-conceived designs. By identifying such subgrade issues in the design stage, or even the potential for such problems along an alignment, alternative designs can be established. Alternate designs can then be placed in the bid documents with indicators clearly identified that show where these alternatives should be considered, and then implemented if and where such conditions are encountered. When these special subgrade conditions are not recognized in design, they are often identified during construction, usually resulting in claims and overruns. However, identifying problems in construction is still somewhat fortunate, considering the impact such problems may have on the pavement performance. If the soil conditions described in this section go undetected, there typically is decreased serviceability, usually resulting in premature localized rehabilitation or, not uncommon, reconstruction of the pavement within the first few years of the pavement performance period. 7.5.1 Problematic Soil Types Obviously, a pavement is to be constructed on whatever material and condition is naturally occurring. The strength and stability of some soils can present problems during construction and certainly can affect the long-term performance of the pavement during its service life. In order to properly discuss these potential problems, it is necessary to define some terms as they relate to problematic mineralogy (Sowers, 1979). Some of the terms are true geological terminology, while some are local or regional terminology. The terms may describe a particular material or condition, but all are problematic and care must be taken when constructing pavements in regions containing these materials. Adobe. Sandy clays of medium plasticity found in the semiarid regions of the southwestern U.S. These soils have been used for centuries to make sun-dried brick. The name is also applied to some highly plastic clays of the West, which swell significantly when wet. Bentonite. Highly plastic clay, usually montmorillonite, resulting from the decomposition of volcanic ash. It may be hard when dry, but swells considerably when wet. Buckshot clay. Applied to clays of the southern and southwestern United States. Cracks into small, hard, relatively uniform sized lumps on drying. Dry lumps will degrade upon wetting (e.g., after they have been used as fill). These soils also tend to swell when wet. Caliche. A silt or sand of the semiarid areas of the southwestern United States that is cemented with calcium carbonate. The calcium carbonate is deposited by the evaporation of water brought to the ground surface by capillary action. The consistency of caliche varies from soft rock to firm soil. Coquina. A soft, porous limestone made up largely of shells, coral, and fossils cemented together. Very friable, and breaks down during construction. Gumbo. A fine-grained, highly plastic clay of the Mississippi Valley. It has a sticky, greasy feel, highly expansive, and forms large shrinkage cracks on drying. Kaolin. A white or pink clay of low plasticity. It is composed largely of minerals of the kaolinite family. Loam. A surface soil that may be described as a sandy silt of low plasticity or a silty sand that is well suited to tilling. It applies to soils within the uppermost horizons and should not be used to describe deep deposits of parent material. Loam-type soils are typically sensitive to moisture, easily disturbed in construction, and frost susceptible. Loess. A deposit of relatively uniform, windblown silt. It has a loose structure, with numerous rootholes that produce vertical cleavage and high vertical permeability. It consists of angular to subrounded quartz and feldspar particles cemented with calcium carbonate or iron oxide. Upon saturation, it becomes soft and compressible because of the loss of cementing. Loess altered by weathering in a humid climate often becomes more dense and somewhat plastic (loess loam). Loess is also highly frost susceptible. Marine clay. Clays deposited in a marine environment, which, if later uplifted, tend to be extra sensitive due to salt leaching, dramatically losing strength when disturbed. Marl. A water-deposited sand, silt, or clay containing calcium carbonate. Marls are often light to dark gray or greenish in color and sometimes contain colloidal organic matter. They are often indurated into soft rock. Muck or mud. An extremely soft, slimy silt or organic silt found on river and lake bottoms. The terms indicate an extremely soft consistency rather than any particular type of soil. Muck implies organic matter. Peat. A naturally occurring highly organic substance derived primarily from plant materials (ASTM D 5715). Peats are dark brown or black, loose (void ratio may be 5 to 10), and extremely compressible. When dried, they will float. Peat bogs often emit quantities of inflammable methane gas. These soils will experience significant short-term and long-term settlement, even under light loads, and are often moisture sensitive, losing significant strength when wet. They are easily disturbed under construction activities. Peat containing a high degree of easily identifiable fibers is often called fibrous peat for geotechnical applications. Peat containing highly decomposed fibers and a significant highly organic soil component is often called amorphous peat. Quicksand. Refers to a condition, not a soil type. Gravels, sands, and silts become \"quick\" when an upward flow of groundwater and/or gas takes place to such a degree that the particles are lifted. Saprolites. Soils developed from in-situ weathering of rocks. Relic joints from the parent rock often control the weathered soils' strength, permeability, and stability. Fragments may appear sound, but prove to be weak. Identifying the transition of soil to weathered rock to sound rock is difficult, often resulting in claims. Shale. Indurated, fine grained, sedimentary rocks, such as mudstones, siltstone, and claystone, which are highly variable and troublesome. Some are hard and stable, while others are soft and degrade into clay soon after exposure to the atmosphere or during the design life of the structure. Clays developed from shale are often highly plastic. Sulfate. A mineral compound characterized by the sulfate radical SO4, which may be contained in soil. It creates significant expansion problems in lime-stabilized soil and, in some cases, distress in concrete. Sulfide. A mineral compound characterized by the linkage of sulfur with a metal, such as lead or iron, creating galena and pyrite, respectively. Till. A mixture of sand, gravel, silt, and clay produced by the plowing action of glaciers. The name boulder clay is often given such soils, particularly in Canada and England. The characteristics of glacial till vary depending on the sediments and bedrock eroded. The tills in New England are typically coarser and less plastic that those from the Midwest. The tills in the Northeast tend to be broadly graded and often unstable under water action. The complex nature of their deposition creates a highly unpredictable material. Topsoils. Surface soils that support plant life. They usually contain considerable organic matter. These soils tend to settle over time as organic matter continues to degrade. They are often moisture sensitive, losing significant strength when wet, and are easily disturbed under construction activities. Tuff. The name applied to deposits of volcanic ash. In humid climates or in areas in which ash falls into bodies of water, the tuff becomes cemented into a soft, porous rock. Varved clays. Sedimentary deposits consisting of alternate thin layers of silt and clay. Ordinarily, each pair of silt and clay layers is from 3 - 13 mm (1/8 - 1/2 in.) thick. They are the result of deposition in lakes during periods of alternating high and low water in the inflowing streams, and are often formed in glacial lakes. These deposits have a much higher horizontal than vertical permeability, with the horizontal seams holding water. They are often sensitive, and will lose strength when remolded. 7.5.2 Compressible Soils Effect of Compressible Soils on Pavement Performance Highly compressible (very weak) soils are susceptible to large settlements and deformations with time that can have a detrimental effect on pavement performance. Highly compressible soils are very low density, saturated soils, usually silts, clays, and organic alluvium or wind blown deposits and peats. If these compressible soils are not treated properly, large surface depressions with random cracking can develop. The surface depressions can allow water to pond on the pavement's surface and more readily infiltrate the pavement structure, compounding a severe problem. More importantly, the ponding of water will create a safety hazard to the traveling public during wet weather. Treatments for Compressible Soils The selection of a particular technique depends on the depth of the weak soil, and the difference between the in-situ conditions and the minimum compaction or strength requirements to limit the amount of anticipated settlement to a permissible value that will not adversely affect pavement performance. When constructing roadways in areas with deep deposits of highly compressible layers, the specific soil properties must be examined to calculate the estimated settlement. Under these conditions, a geotechnical investigation and detailed settlement analysis must be completed prior to the pavement design. When existing subgrade soils do not meet minimum compaction requirements and are susceptible to large settlements over time, consider the following alternatives: Remove and process soil to attain the approximate optimum moisture content, and replace and compact. Remove and replace subgrade soil with suitable borrow or select embankment materials. All granular fill materials should be compacted to at least 95% of the maximum density, with moisture control, as defined by AASHTO T180. Cohesive fill materials should be compacted to no less than 90%, near or slightly greater than optimum moisture content (e.g., -1% to +2% of optimum), as defined by AASHTO T99. Consider mechanical stabilization using geosynthetics as covered in Section 7.5 to reduce the amount of undercut required. If soils are granular (e.g., sands and some silts), consider compaction of the soils from the surface to increase the dry density through dynamic compaction techniques. Identification of soil characteristics and detailed procedures for the successful implementation of this technique covered in FHWA/NHI course 132034 on Ground Improvement Techniques (FHWA NHI-04-001). If the soil is extremely wet or saturated, consider dewatering using well points or deep horizontal drains. If horizontal drains cannot be daylighted, connection to storm drainage pipes or sump pumps may be required. Consolidate deep deposits of very weak saturated soils with large fills prior to pavement construction (surcharge). After construction, the fills can either be left in-place or removed, depending on the final elevation. Consider wick drains to accelerate consolidation (see FHWA NHI-04-001). Other techniques for deep deposits of compressible soil include piled embankments and use of lightweight fill, such as geofoam, as covered in the FHWA Ground Improvement Techniques manual (FHWA NHI-04-001). Although more costly than most of the previous techniques in terms of construction dollars, these techniques offer immediate improvement, thus accelerating construction. On some projects, the time savings may be more valuable than the construction cost differential. 7.5.3 Collapsible Soils As with highly compressible soils, collapsible soils can lead to significant localized subsidence of the pavement. Collapsible soils are very low density silt type soils, usually alluvium or wind blown (loess) deposits, and are susceptible to sudden decreases in volume when wetted. Often their unstable structure has been cemented by clay binders or other deposits, which will dissolve on saturation, allowing a dramatic decrease in volume (Rollings and Rollings, 1996). Native subgrades of collapsible soils should be soaked with water prior to construction and rolled with heavy compaction equipment. In some cases, residual soils may also be collapsible due to leaching of colloidal and soluble materials. Figure 7-17 provides a method of identifying the potential for collapsible soils. Other local methods for identification may be available. Collapsible soils can also be created in fills when sand type soils are compacted on the dry side of optimum moisture. Meniscus forces between particles can create a soil fabric susceptible to collapse. If pavement systems are to be constructed over collapsible soils, special remedial measures may be required to prevent large-scale cracking and differential settlement. To avoid problems, collapse must be induced prior to construction. Methods include: ponding water over the region of collapsible soils. infiltration wells. compaction - conventional with heavy vibratory roller for shallow depths (within 0.3 or 0.6 m (1 or 2 ft)) compaction - dynamic or vibratory for deeper deposits of more than half a meter (a few feet) (could be combined with inundation) excavated and replaced. Figure 7-17. Guide to collapsible soil behavior (Rollings and Rollings, 1996).Click here for text version of image 7.5.4 Swelling Soils Effect of Swelling Soils on Pavement Performance Swelling or expansive soils are susceptible to volume change (shrink and swell) with seasonal fluctuations in moisture content. The magnitude of this volume change is dependent on the type of soil (shrink-swell potential) and its change in moisture content. A loss of moisture will cause the soil to shrink, while an increase in moisture will cause it to expand or swell. This volume change of clay type soils can result in longitudinal cracks near the pavement's edge and significant surface roughness (varying swells and depressions) along the pavement's length. Expansive soils are a very significant problem in many parts of the United States (see Figure 7-18) and are responsible for the application of premature maintenance and rehabilitation activities on many miles of roadway each year. Expansive soils are especially a problem when deep cuts are made in a dense (over-consolidated) clay soil. Figure 7-18. Estimated location of swelling soils (from Witczak, 1972). Identification of Swelling Soils Various techniques and procedures exist for identifying potentially expansive soils. AASHTO T 258 can be used to identify soils and conditions that are susceptible to swell. Two of the more commonly used documents are listed below: An Evaluation of Expedient Methodology for Identification of Potentially Expansive Soils, Report No. FHWA-RD-77-94, Federal Highway Administration, Washington, D.C., June 1977. Design and Construction of Airport Pavements on Expansive Soils, Report No. FAA-RD-76-66, Federal Aviation Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation, Washington, D.C., June 1976. Clay mineralogy and the availability of water are the key factors in determining the degree to which a swelling problem may exist at a given site. Different clay minerals exhibit greater or lesser degrees of swell potential based on their specific chemistry. Montmorillonitic clays tend to exhibit very high swell potentials due to the particle chemistry, whereas illitic clays tend to exhibit very low swell potentials. Identification of clay minerals through chemical or microscopic means may be used as a method of identifying the presence of high swell potential in soils. The soil fabric will also influence the swell potential, as aggregated particles will tend to exhibit higher swell than dispersed particles, and flocculated higher than deflocculated. Generally, the finer-grained and more plastic the soil, the higher the swell potential the soil will exhibit. The identification of swelling soils in the subgrade is a key component of the geotechnical investigation for the roadway. Soils at shallow depths beneath the proposed pavement elevation are generally sampled as part of the investigation, and their swell potential may be identified in a number of ways. Index testing is a common method for identifying swell potential. Laboratory testing to obtain the plastic and liquid limits and/or the shrinkage limit will usually be conducted. The soil activity (ASTM D 4318), defined as the ratio of the plasticity index to the percentage of the soil by weight finer than 0.002 mm (0.08 mils) is also used as an index property for swell potential, since clay minerals of higher activity exhibit higher swell. Activity calculation requires measurement of gradation using hydrometer methods, which is not typical in geotechnical investigations for pavement design in many states. In addition to index testing, agency practice in regions where swelling soils are a common problem may include swell testing (e.g., ASTM D 4546), for natural or compacted soil samples. Such testing generally includes measurement of the change in height (or volume) of a sample exposed to light loading similar to that expected in the field and then allowed free access to water. Treatment for Swelling Soils When expansive soils are encountered along a project in environments and areas where significant moisture fluctuations in the subgrade are expected, consideration should be given to the following alternatives to minimize future volume change potential of the expansive soil: For relatively thin layers of expansive clays near the surface, remove and replace the expansive soil with select borrow materials. Extend the width of the subsurface pavement layers to reduce the change (i.e., wetting or drying) in subgrade moisture along the pavement's edge, and increase the roadway crown to reduce infiltration moisture. Partial encapsulation along the edge of the pavement or full encapsulation can also be used to reduce change in subgrade moisture, as described in greater detail in Section 7.5. Scarify, stabilize, and recompact the upper portion of the expansive clay subgrade. Lime or cement stabilization is an accepted method for controlling the swelling of soils, as discussed in Section 7.6. (Stabilization, as used for expansive soils, refers to the treatment of a soil with such agents as bitumen, Portland cement, slaked or hydrated lime, and flyash to limit its volume change characteristics. This can substantially increase the strength of the treated material.) In areas with deep cuts in dense, over-consolidated expansive clays, complete the excavation of the subsurface soils to the proper elevation, and allow the subsurface soils to rebound prior to placing the pavement layers. AASHTO 1993 (Appendix C) provides procedures and graphs to predict the direct effect of swelling soils on serviceability loss and is treated with respect to the differential effects on the longitudinal profile of the road surface. If the swelling is anticipated to be relatively uniform, then the procedures do not apply. 7.5.5 Subsurface Water It is important to identify any saturated soil strata, the depth to groundwater, and subsurface water flow between soil strata. Subsurface water is especially important to recognize and identify in the transition areas between cut and fill segments. If allowed to saturate unbound base/subbase materials and subgrade soils, subsurface water can significantly decrease the strength and stiffness of these materials. Reductions in strength can result in premature surface depressions, rutting, or cracking. Seasonal moisture flow through selected soil strata can also significantly magnify the effects of differential volume change in expansive soils. Cut areas are particularly critical for subsurface water. Treatments for Subsurface Water When saturated soils or subsurface water are encountered, consideration should be given to the following alternatives for improving the foundation or supporting subgrade: For saturated soils near the surface, dry or strengthen the wet soils through the use of mechanical stabilization techniques to provide a construction platform for the pavement structure, as described in Section 7.6. Remove and replace the saturated soils with select borrow materials or soils. (May not be an option if excavation is required below the groundwater level). Place and properly compact thick fills or embankments to increase the elevation of the subgrade, or in other words, increase the thickness between the saturated soils or water table depth and pavement structure. Consideration should also be given to the use of subgrade drains as previously detailed in Section 7.2 whenever the following conditions exist: High ground-water levels that may reduce subgrade stability and provide a source of water for frost action. Subgrade soils consisting of silts and very fine sands that may become quick or spongy when saturated. Water seeps from underlying water-bearing strata or from subgrades in cut areas (consider intercepting drains). 7.5.6 Frost-Susceptible Soils Effect of Frost Action on Pavement Performance Frost action can cause differential heaving, surface roughness and cracking, blocked drainage, and a reduction in bearing capacity during thaw periods. These effects range from slight to severe, depending on types and uniformity of subsoil, regional climatic conditions (i.e., depth of freeze), and the availability of water. One effect of frost action on pavements is frost heaving caused by crystallization of ice lenses in voids of soils containing fine particles. As shown in Figure 7-19, three conditions must be present to cause frost heaving and associated frost action problems: frost-susceptible soils; subfreezing temperatures in the soil; and, source of water. If these conditions occur uniformly, heaving will be uniform; otherwise, differential heaving will occur, causing surface irregularities, roughness, and ultimately cracking of the pavement surface. Figure 7-19. Elements of frost heave. A second effect of frost action is thaw weakening. The bearing capacity may be reduced substantially during mid-winter thawing periods, and subsequent frost heaving is usually more severe because water is more readily available to the freezing zone. In more-southerly areas of the frost zone, several cycles of freeze and thaw may occur during a winter season and cause more damage than one longer period of freezing in more-northerly areas. Spring thaws normally produce a loss of bearing capacity to well below summer and fall values, followed by a gradual recovery over a period of weeks or months. Water is also often trapped above frozen soil during the thaw, which occurs from the top down, creating the potential for long-term saturated conditions in pavement layers. Identification of Frost-Susceptible Soils Frost-susceptible soils have been classified into four general groups. Table 7-12 provides a summary of the typical soils in each of these four groups based on the amount of fines (material passing the 0.075 mm (No. 200) sieve. Figure 7-20 graphically displays the expected average rate of frost heave for the different soil groups based on portion of soil finer than 0.02 mm (0.8 mils). Little to no frost action occurs in clean, free draining sands, gravels, crushed rock, and similar granular materials, under normal freezing conditions. The large void space permits water to freeze in-place without segregation into ice lenses. Conversely, silts are highly frost-susceptible. The condition of relatively small voids, high capillary potential/action, and relatively good permeability of these soils accounts for this characteristic. Table 7-12. Frost susceptibility classification of soils (NCHRP 1-37A). Frost GroupDegree of Frost SusceptibilityType of SoilPercentage Finer than 0.075 mm (# 200) by wt.Typical Soil Classification F1Negligible to lowGravelly soils3-10GC, GP, GC-GM, GP-GM F2Low to mediumGravelly soils10-20GM, GC-GM, GP-GM Sands3-15SW, SP, SM, SW-SM, SP-SM F3HighGravelly SoilsGreater than 20GM-GC Sands, except very fine silty sandsGreater than 15SM, SC Clays PI > 12-CL, CH F4Very highAll Silts-ML-MH Very Fine Silty SandsGreater than 15SM Clays PI < 12-CL, CL-ML Varied clays and other fine grained, banded sediments-CL, ML, SM, CH Figure 7-20. Average rate of heave versus % fines for natural soil gradations (Kaplar, 1974). Clays are cohesive and, although their potential capillary action is high, their capillary rate is low. Although frost heaving can occur in clay soils, it is not as severe as for silts, since the impervious nature of the clays makes passage of water slow. The supporting capacity of clays must be reduced greatly during thaws, even in the absence of significant heave. Thawing usually takes place from the top downward, leading to very high moisture contents in the upper strata. A groundwater level within 1.5 m (5 ft) of the proposed subgrade elevation is an indication that sufficient water will exist for ice formation. Homogeneous clay subgrade soils also contain sufficient moisture for ice formation, even with depth to groundwater in excess of 3 m (10 ft). However, the magnitude of influence will be highly dependent on the depth of the freezing front (i.e., frost depth penetration). For deep frost penetration, groundwater at even a greater depth could have an influence on heave. Identification of Frost-Susceptible Conditions The most distinguishing factor for identifying a pavement frost hazard condition is water supply. For frost susceptible soils within the frost zone, the frost hazard may be rated as high or low, according to the following conditions. An unknown rating may be appropriate when conditions for both high and low ratings occur and cannot be resolved, or when little or no information is available. The inclusion of a frost hazard rating in the site evaluation documentation verifies that an evaluation of frost action has been attempted and has not been overlooked. When the rating is unknown, a decision to include frost action mitigation measures in a design will be based more upon the unacceptable nature of frost damage than the probability of occurrence. The conditions associated with a high frost hazard potential include: A water table within 3 m (10 ft) of the pavement surface (depth of influence depends on the type of soil and frost depth). Observed frost heaves in the area. Inorganic soils containing more than 3% (by weight) or more grains finer than 0.02 mm (0.8 mils) in diameter according to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. A potential for the ponding of surface water and the occurrence of soils between the frost zone beneath the pavement and the surface water with permeabilities high enough to enable seepage to saturate soils within the frost zone during the term of ponding. The conditions associated with a low frost hazard potential include: A water table greater than 6 m (20 ft) below the pavement surface (again, could be much shallower depending on the type of soil and frost depth). Natural moisture content in the frost zone low versus the saturation level. Seepage barriers between the water supply and the frost zone. Existing pavements or sidewalks in the vicinity with similar soil and water supply conditions and without constructed frost protection measures that have not experienced frost damage. Pavements on embankments with surfaces more than 1 - 2 m (3 - 6 ft) above the adjacent grades (provides some insulation and a weighting action to resist heave). Treatment for Frost Action When frost-susceptible soils are encountered, consideration should be given to the following alternatives for improving the foundation or supporting subgrade: Remove the frost-susceptible soil (generally for groups F3 and F4, Table 7-12) and replace with select non-frost susceptible borrow to the expected frost depth penetration. Place and compact select non-frost-susceptible borrow materials to a thickness or depth to prevent subgrade freezing for frost susceptible soil groups F2, F3, and F4, Table 7-12. Remove isolated pockets of frost-susceptible soils to eliminate abrupt changes in subgrade conditions. Stabilize the frost-susceptible soil by eliminating the effects of soil fines by three processes: a) mechanically removing or immobilizing by means of physical-chemical means, such as cementitious bonding, b) effectively reducing the quantity of soil moisture available for migration to the freezing plane, as by essentially blocking off all migratory passages, or c) altering the freezing point of the soil moisture. Cementing agents, such as Portland cement, bitumen, lime, and lime-flyash, as covered in Section 7.5. These agents effectively remove individual soil particles by bonding them together, and also act to partially remove capillary passages, thereby reducing the potential for moisture movement. Care must be taken when using lime and lime-flyash mixtures with clay soils in seasonal frost areas (see Section 7.5 & Appendix F). Soil moisture available for frost heave can be mitigated through the installation of deep drains and/or a capillary barrier such that the water table is maintained at a sufficient depth to prevent moisture rise in the freezing zone. Capillary barriers can consist of either an open graded gravel layer sandwiched between two geotextiles, or a horizontal geocomposite drain. The installation of a capillary barrier requires the removal of the frost susceptible material to a depth either below frost penetration or sufficiently significant to reduce the influence of frost heave on the pavement. The capillary break must be drained. The frost susceptible soil can then be replaced and compacted above the capillary barrier to the required subgrade elevation. Increase the pavement structural layer thickness to account for strength reduction in the subgrade during the spring-thaw period for frost-susceptible groups F1, F2, and F3. Pavement design for frost action often determines the required overall thickness of flexible pavements and the need for additional select material beneath both rigid and flexible pavements. Three design approaches have been used for pavement in seasonal frost areas: The Complete Protection approach-requires non-frost susceptible materials for the entire depth of frost (e.g., treatment methods 1, 2, and 3 above). Limited Subgrade Frost Penetration approach-permits some frost penetration into the subgrade, but not enough to allow unacceptable surface roughness to develop. Reduced Subgrade Strength approach-allows more frost penetration into the subgrade, but provides adequate strength during thaw weakened periods. AASHTO 1993 (Appendix C) provides procedures and graphs to predict the direct effect of frost heave on serviceability loss and is treated with respect to the differential effects on the longitudinal profile of the road surface. If the frost is anticipated to be relatively uniform, then the procedures do not apply. For the most part, local frost-resistant design approaches have been developed from experience, rather than by application of some rigorous theoretical computational method. A more rigorous method is available in the NCHRP 1-37A design procedure to reduce the effects of seasonal freezing and thawing to acceptable limits, as discussed in Chapter 6. The Enhanced Integrated Climatic Model is used to determine the maximum frost depth for the pavement system at a particular location. Various combinations of layer thicknesses and material types can be evaluated in terms of their impact on the maximum frost depth and total amount of base and select materials necessary to protect the frost susceptible soils from freezing. 7.5.7 Summary Problematic soils can be treated using a variety of methods or a combination thereof. Improvement techniques that can be used to improve the strength and reduce the climatic variation of the foundation on pavement performance include: Improvement of subsurface drainage (see Section 7.2, and should always be considered). Removal and replacement with better materials (e.g., thick granular layers). Mechanical stabilization using thick granular layers. Mechanical stabilization of weak soils with geosynthetics (geotextiles and geogrids) in conjunction with granular layers. Lightweight fill. Stabilization of weak soils with admixtures (highly plastic or compressible soils). Soil encapsulation. Details for most of these stabilization methods will be reviewed in the next section. << PreviousContentsNext >> More Information Geotech Research Geotech Software State Geotechnical Workshops Contact Silas Nichols Office of Bridges and Structures 202-366-1554 E-mail Silas Updated: 06/27/2017 Privacy Policy | Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) | Accessibility | Web Policies & Notices | No Fear Act | Report Waste, Fraud and Abuse U.S. DOT Home | USA.gov | WhiteHouse.gov Federal Highway Administration | 1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE | Washington, DC 20590 | 202-366-4000", "What Do the Weather Terms Mean? Menutimeanddate.comSearch \u00d7Site / ArticlesCity / CountrySocial \u00d7Share this page / Follow us on:FacebookTweetFollowTwitterVisit us on:FacebookTwitter BackMy accountMy LocationMy UnitsMy EventsMy World ClockMy PrivacyPaid ServicesSign inRegisterBackHomeNewsletterAbout UsSite MapAccount/SettingsArticle TopicsBackWorld ClockMain World ClockExtended World ClockPersonal World ClockWorld Time Lookup Time ArticlesBackTime ZonesTime Zone ConverterInternational Meeting PlannerEvent Time AnnouncerTime Zone MapTime Zone AbbreviationsTime Zone NewsDaylight Saving TimeTime Changes WorldwideTime DifferenceTime Zone ArticlesBackCalendarCalendar InfoCalendar 2019Calendar 2020Monthly CalendarPrintable Calendar (PDF)Add Your Own Calendar EventsCalendar CreatorAdvanced Calendar CreatorHolidays WorldwideOn This Day in HistoryCalendar ArticlesBackWeatherWorldwideLocal Weather2-Week ForecastHour-by-HourPast WeekClimateBackSun & MoonSun CalculatorMoon CalculatorMoon PhasesSeasonsEclipsesNight SkyDay and Night MapMoon Light World MapMeteor ShowersAstronomy ArticlesBackTimersStopwatchTimerCountdown to Any DateNew Year CountdownNew Year TriviaBackCalculatorsDate to Date Calculator (duration)Business Date to Date (exclude holidays)Date Calculator (add / subtract)Business Date (exclude holidays)International Dialing CodesDistance CalculatorDistance SignpostTravel Time CalculatorWeekday CalculatorWeek Number CalculatorBackApps & APIiOS AppsAndroid AppsWindows AppFree ClockFree CountdownAPI for DevelopersBackFree FunFree Clock for Your SiteFree Countdown for Your SiteWord ClockFun HolidaysAlternative Age CalculatorDate Pattern CalculatorFun Fact ArticlesHome \u00a0 Weather \u00a0 Weather Glossary \u2013 Terms & DefinitionsWeather Glossary \u2013 Terms & DefinitionsTerminology used in weather reports, forecasts, and readings. Names and words used to describe the weather and climate.Forecasts, past weather, and climate information for your locationA | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P | Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | ZTopAcid rainCloud or rain droplets containing pollutants, such as oxides of sulfur and nitrogen, to make them acidic (eg. pH < 5.6).AfternoonNoon to sunset.Arctic airA mass of very cold, dry air that usually originates over the Arctic Ocean north of Canada and Alaska.Arctic highA very cold high pressure that originates over the Arctic Ocean.TopBall lightningA relatively rarely seen form of lightning, generally consisting of an orange or reddish ball of the order of a few cm to 30cm in diameter and of moderate luminosity, which may move up to 1 m/s horizontally with a lifetime of a second or two.Barber poleA thunderstorm updraft with a visual appearance including cloud striations that are curved in a manner similar to the stripes of a barber pole. The structure typically is most pronounced on the leading edge of the updraft, while drier air from the rear flank downdraft often erodes the clouds on the trailing side of the updraft.BarometerAn instrument for measuring atmospheric pressure.Barometric pressureThe actual pressure value indicated by a pressure sensor.Bitterly coldIn winter, bitterly cold or very cold, refers to more than seven degrees Celsius below normal.Black iceThin, new ice that forms on fresh water or dew covered surfaces; it is common on roadways during the fall and early winter and appears \"black\" because of its transparency.BlizzardIncludes winter storm conditions of sustained winds or frequent gusts of 35 mph or more that cause major blowing and drifting of snow, reducing visibility to less than one-quarter mile for 3 or more hours. Extremely cold temperatures often are associated with dangerous blizzard conditions. In Canada, a blizzard described as a severe storm that lasts three or more hours, and brings low temperatures, strong winds and poor visibility due to blowing snow. In Australia, it is described as a violent and very cold wind which is loaded with snow, some of which has been raised from snow covered ground.Blocking highA high pressure area (anticyclone), often aloft, that remains nearly stationary or moves slowly compared to west-to-east motion. It blocks the movement eastward movement of low pressure areas (cyclones) at its latitude.Blowing DustDust that is raised by the wind to moderate heights above the ground to a degree that horizontal visibility decreases to less than seven miles. Visibilities of 1/8 mile or less over a widespread area are criteria for a Blowing Dust Advisory.Blowing sandSand particles picked up from the surface of the earth by the wind to moderate heights above the ground, reducing the reported horizontal visibility to less than seven statute miles.Blowing snowWind driven snow that reduces visibility to six miles or less causing significant drifting. Blowing snow may be snow that is falling and/or loose snow on the ground picked up by the wind. In Canada, it is described as snow that is lifted by the wind from the earth's surface to a height of two meters or more.Blowing sprayWater droplets torn by the wind from a body of water, generally from the crests of waves, and carried up into the air in such quantities that they reduce the reported horizontal visibility to less than seven statute miles.BlusteryDescriptive term for gusty winds that accompany cold weather.BreezyWind in the range of 15 miles per hour to 25 mile per hour with mild or warm temperatures.BriskWind in the range of 15 to 25 miles per hour when the temperature is cold.Broken cloudsClouds which cover between 5/8ths and 7/8ths of the sky.TopCalmThe absence of apparent motion in the air.CelsiusA temperature scale in which zero is the freezing point of water and one hundred is the boiling point.ChinookA Chinook is a warm, dry, gusty wind that occasionally occurs to the leeward side of a mountain range, particularly the Rocky Mountains.Cirrus cloudHigh cloud, delicate, hair-like and feathery looking.ClearSky condition of less than 1/10 cloud coverage.\tIn the United Kingdom, clear is defined as \u201cNo cloud\u201d, and in Australia, it is defined as \u201cVirtually cloud-free\u201d.Clear slotA local region of clearing skies or reduced cloud cover, indicating an intrusion of drier air; often seen as a bright area with higher cloud bases on the west or southwest side of a wall cloud.ClimateThe prevalent long term weather conditions in a particular area. Climatic elements include precipitation, temperature, humidity, sunshine and wind velocity and phenomena such as fog, frost, and hail storms. Climate cannot be considered a satisfactory indicator of actual conditions since it is based upon a vast number of elements taken as an average.CloudburstA sudden, intense rainfall that is normally of short duration.CloudyCloudy means that clouds cover more than 60 percent of the sky.Coastal flood warningIssued when there is widespread coastal flooding expected within 12 hours, more than just a typical overwash.ColdIn the winter, cold refers to four to seven degrees Celsius below normal.Cold Advection (CAA)Transport of cold air into a region by horizontal winds.Cold frontA narrow transition zone separating advancing colder air from retreating warmer air. The air behind a cold front is cooler and typically drier than the air it is replacing.Cold lowA low pressure system with cold air mass from near the surface to all vertical levels (also called a cold core low).Cold-air-funnelA funnel cloud or (rarely) a small, relatively weak tornado that can develop from a small shower or thunderstorm when the air aloft is unusually cold (hence the name). They are much less violent than other types of tornadoes.Collar cloudFrequently used as a synonym for wall cloud, although it actually is a generally circular ring of cloud surrounding the upper portion of a wall cloud.Combined seasThe combined height of swell and wind waves.CondensationThe process by which water vapor becomes a liquid; the opposite of evaporation, which is the conversion of liquid to vapor. In Australia, it is described as a change from a gas to a liquid.ConfluenceA pattern of wind flow in which air flows inward toward an axis oriented parallel to the general direction of flow. It is the opposite of difluence. Confluence is not the same as convergence. Winds often accelerate as they enter a confluent zone, resulting in speed divergence which offsets the (apparent) converging effect of the confluent flow.Congestus (or Cumulus congestus)A large cumulus cloud with great vertical development, usually with a cauliflower-like appearance, but lacking the characteristic anvil shaped top of a Cb (Cumulonimbus cloud).Continental air massA dry air mass originating over a large land area.ConvectionThe transfer of heat within the air by its movement. The term is used specifically to describe vertical transport of heat and moisture, especially by updrafts and downdrafts in an unstable atmosphere.ConvergenceAn atmospheric condition that exists when the winds cause a horizontal net inflow of air into a specified region. Divergence is the opposite, where winds cause a horizontal net outflow of air from a specified region.Cumulonimbus CloudA vertically developed cloud, often capped by an anvil shaped cloud. Also called a thunderstorm cloud, it is frequently accompanied by heavy showers, lightning, thunder, and sometimes hail or gusty winds. In Australia, it is described as a heavy, puffy, heaped, dark cloud of great vertical depth, often bringing rain. Some have a distinctive anvil shaped head. Cumulus cloudA cloud in the shape of individual detached domes, with a flat base and a bulging upper portion resembling cauliflower. In Australia, it is described as a cloud with a woolly, heaped appearance that often produces rain. Cumulus congestusA large cumulus cloud with great vertical development, usually with a cauliflower-like appearance, but lacking the characteristic anvil shaped top of a Cb (Cumulonimbus cloud).CycloneAn area of low pressure around which winds blow counterclockwise in the Northern Hemisphere. Also the term used for a hurricane in the Indian Ocean and in the Western Pacific Ocean. In Australia, it is described as atmospheric circulations that rotate clockwise in the southern hemisphere, and anti-clockwise in the northern hemisphere. Cyclones are areas of lower pressure and generally associated with stronger winds, unsettled conditions, cloudiness and rainfall.TopDaySunrise to sunset. Day of the week (eg. Monday)Midnight to midnight.Debris cloudA rotating \"cloud\" of dust or debris, near or on the ground, often appearing beneath a condensation funnel and surrounding the base of a tornado.Dense fogA fog in which the visibility is less than one-quarter mile.DepressionA region of low atmospheric pressure that is usually accompanied by low clouds and precipitation.Dew pointThe temperature to which the air must be cooled for water vapor to condense and form fog or clouds.Diamond dustA fall of non-branched (snow crystals are branched) ice crystals in the form of needles, columns, or plates.DifluenceA pattern of wind flow in which air moves outward (in a \"fan-out\" pattern) away from a central axis that is oriented parallel to the general direction of the flow. It is the opposite of confluence.\tDisturbanceA disruption of the atmosphere that usually refers to a low pressure area, cool air and inclement weather.\tDownburstA strong downdraft resulting in an outward burst of damaging winds on or near the ground. Downburst winds can produce damage similar to a strong tornado.\tDowndraftA column of generally cool air that rapidly sinks to the ground, usually accompanied by precipitation as in a shower or thunderstorm.\tDownslope windAir that descends an elevated plain and consequently warms and dries. Occurs when prevailing wind direction is from the same direction as the elevated terrain and often produces fair weather conditions.DraftA draft is a small gusty air current that moves upward or downward abruptly; hence the terms updraft and downdraft.Drifting snowUneven distribution of snowfall caused by strong surface winds. Drifting snow does not reduce visibility. In Canada, it is defined as snow blown to a height of less than two meters.DrizzleSmall, slowly falling water droplets, with diameters between .2 and .5 millimeters. In Australia, it is defined as fairly uniform precipitation (rain) composed exclusively of very small water droplets (less than 0.5 mm in diameter) very close to one another. DroughtAbnormally dry weather in a region over an extended period sufficient to cause a serious hydrological (water cycle) imbalance in the affected area. This can cause such problems as crop damage and water-supply shortage. In Australia, it is defined as the prolonged absence or marked deficiency of precipitation (rain).DryFree from rain. Normally used when preceding weather has also been relatively dry and dry weather is expected to continue for a day or so.Dust stormAn area where high surface winds have picked up loose dust, reducing visibility to less than one-half mile. In Australia, it is described as a storm which carries large amounts of dust into the atmosphere.TopEarlyUntil two hours after sunrise.El Ni\u00f1oA major warming of the equatorial waters in the eastern Pacific Ocean. El Ni\u00f1o events usually occur every three to seven years, and are related to shifts in global weather patterns. (Spanish for the \"Christ Child\u201d because it often begins around Christmas.)EvaporationThe process of a liquid changing into a vapor or gas. EveningSunset to midnight.Extended outlookA basic forecast of general weather conditions three to five days in the future.Extratropical cycloneA storm that forms outside the tropics, sometimes as a tropical storm or hurricane changes. See table below for differences between extratropical and tropical cyclones.TopFahrenheitThe standard scale used to measure temperature in the United States; in which the freezing point of water is 32 degrees and the boiling point is 212 degrees.FairDescribes weather in which there is less than 4/10ths of opaque cloud cover, no precipitation, and there is no extreme visibility, wind or temperature conditions.Fall windA strong, cold, downslope wind.FineNo rain or other precipitation (hail, snow etc.). The use of fine is generally avoided in excessively cloudy, windy, foggy or dusty conditions. In particular note that fine means the absence of rain or other precipitation such as hail or snow - not 'good' or 'pleasant' weather.Flash floodA flood that occurs within a few hours (usually less than six) of heavy or excessive rainfall, dam or levee failure or water released from an ice jam.\t\tFloodA condition that occurs when water overflows the natural or artificial confines of a stream or river; the water also may accumulate by drainage over low-lying areas.\t\tFlood crestThe highest stage or flow occurring in a flood.\t\tFlurryA flurry or snow shower is a snowfall that suddenly stops and starts and changes rapidly in intensity; the accumulation and extent of the snow are limited.FogWater that has condensed close to ground level, producing a cloud of very small droplets that reduces visibility to less than one km (three thousand and three hundred feet). In Canada, fog is defined as a cloud at ground level, and occurs when air is cooled to its dew point and below, or when atmospheric moisture increases through evaporation from water that is warmer than the air. In the United Kingdom, fog is described to occur when visibility less than one kilometer. In Australia, it is defined as a dense mass of small water droplets or particles in the lower atmosphere.FogbowA rainbow that has a white band that appears in fog, and is fringed with red on the outside and blue on the inside. \t\tForecastA forecast provides a description of the most significant weather conditions expected during the current and following days. The exact content depends upon the intended user, such as the Public or Marine forecast audiences. \t\tFreezeOccurs when the surface air temperature is expected to be 32 degrees Fahrenheit or below over a widespread area for a significant period of time. \t In Australia, the term \u201cfreeze\u201d is defined as the change from a liquid to a solid.FreezingThe change in a substance from a liquid to a solid state.\t\tFreezing drizzleDrizzle that falls in liquid form and then freezes upon impact with the ground or an item with a temperature of 32 degrees Fahrenheit or less, possibly producing a thin coating of ice. Even in small amounts, freezing drizzle may cause traveling problems. \t\tFreezing fogA suspension of numerous minute ice crystals in the air, or water droplets at temperatures below zero degrees Celsius, based at the Earth's surface, which reduces horizontal visibility; also called ice fog. \t\tFreezing levelThe altitude in the atmosphere where the temperature drops to 32F. \t\tFreezing rainRain that freezes on objects such as trees, cars and roads, forming a coating or glaze of ice. Temperatures at higher levels are warm enough for rain to form, but surface temperatures are below 32 degrees Fahrenheit, causing the rain to freeze on impact. In Canada, freezing rain is described to occur when the air temperature is below zero Celsius near the ground but above zero Celsius higher up.FrontThe boundary or transition zone between two different air masses. The basic frontal types are cold fronts, warm fronts and occluded fronts.FrostThe formation of thin ice crystals on the ground or other surfaces. Frost develops when the temperature of the exposed surface falls below 32 degrees Fahrenheit and water vapor is deposited as a solid.\tFrost pointWhen the temperature to which air must be cooled to in order to be saturated is below freezing.Fujita scaleSystem developed by Dr Theodore Fujita to classify tornadoes based on wind damage. Scale is from F0 for weakest to F5 for strongest tornadoes. \tFujiwhara effectThe Fujiwhara effect describes the rotation of two storms around each other.Funnel cloudA rotating, cone-shaped column of air extending downward from the base of a thunderstorm but not touching the ground. When it reaches the ground it is called a tornado.\tTopGale warningSustained wind speeds from 34 to 47 knots (39 to 54 mph). \tGlazea layer or coating of ice that is generally smooth and clear, and forms on exposed objects by the freezing of liquid raindrops.\t\tGlobal warmingA theory that increased concentrations of greenhouse gases are causing an elevation in the Earth's surface temperature.\t\tGood visibilityMore than 10 kilometers. \tGreenhouse effectThe warming of the atmosphere by the trapping of longwave radiation (heat) being radiated to space. The gases most responsible for this effect are water vapor and carbon dioxide.\t\tGround fogShallow fog (less than twenty feet deep) produced over the land by the cooling of the lower atmosphere as it comes in contact with the ground. Also known as radiation fog.\tGustA brief sudden increase in wind speed. Generally the duration is less than 20 seconds and the fluctuation greater than 10 miles per hour. In Canada, gust is defined as a sudden, brief increase in wind speed that generally lasts less than 20 seconds. In Australia, gust is defined as any sudden increase of wind of short duration, usually a few seconds.GustnadoGust front tornado. A small tornado, usually weak and short-lived, that occurs along the gust front of a thunderstorm. Often it is visible only as a debris cloud or dust whirl near the ground.TopHailPrecipitation in the form of balls or irregular lumps of ice produced by liquid precipitation, freezing and being coated by layers of ice as it is lifted and cooled in strong updrafts of thunderstorms. \tHazeFine dust or salt particles in the air that reduce visibility. In Canada, haze is defined to consist of fine particles of dust and pollution suspended in the atmosphere, and is distinguished from fog by its bluish or yellowish tinge.Heat balanceThe equilibrium existing between the radiation received and emitted by a planetary system.\t\t\tHeat indexAn index that combines air temperature and humidity to give an apparent temperature (how hot it feels).\t\t\tHeat islandA dome of elevated temperatures over an urban area caused by the heat absorbed by structures and pavement.\t\t\tHeat lightningLightning that can be seen, but is too far away for the thunder to be heard.\tHeat waveA period of abnormally hot weather lasting several days. Heavy snowDepending on the region of the USA, this generally means that four or more inches of snow has accumulated in 12 hours, or six or more inches of snow in 24 hours. \t\t\tHeavy snow warningOlder terminology replaced by winter storm warning for heavy snow. Issued when seven or more inches of snow or sleet is expected in the next 24 hours. A warning is used for winter weather conditions posing a threat to life and property. \tHeavy surfthe result of large waves breaking on or near the shore resulting from swells or produced by a distant storm.HighAn area of high pressure, usually accompanied by anticyclonic and outward wind flow. Also known as an anticyclone. In Canada, a high is described as an area of high atmospheric pressure with a closed, clockwise movement of air. High cloudCirrus, cirrostratus and cirrocumulus.\tHigh risk (of severe thunderstorm)Severe weather is expected to affect more than 10 percent of the area.High wind warningIssued when sustained winds from 40 to 73 mph are expected for at least one hour; or any wind gusts are expected to reach 58 miles per hour or more.\t\tHigh wind watchIssued when conditions are favorable for the development of high winds over all of or part of the forecast area but the occurrence is still uncertain. The criteria of a high wind watch are listed under the high wind warning and should include the area affected, the reason for the watch and the potential impact of the winds. \tHot or very warmIn summer, hot or very warm means more than seven degrees Celsius above normal.Hot spotTypically large areas of pavement, these \"hot spots\" are heated much quicker by the sun than surrounding grasses and forests. As a result, air rises upwards from the relatively hot surface of the pavement, reaches its condensation level, condenses, and forms a cloud above the \"hot spot\". HumidityThe amount of water vapor in the atmosphere. In Canada, it is described as the amount of moisture in the air.HurricaneA severe tropical cyclone with sustained winds over 74 miles per hour (64 knots). Normally applied to such storms in the Atlantic Basin and the Pacific Ocean east of the International Date Line.\tHygrometerAn instrument used to measure humidity.TopIce crystalsIce crystals are tiny sprinkles that sparkle in the sunshine like diamond dust and hang in the air. Ice fogA suspension of numerous minute ice crystals in the air, or water droplets at temperatures below zero degrees Celsius, based at the Earth's surface, which reduces horizontal visibility. Usually occurs at -20 degrees Fahrenheit and below.\t\tIce pelletsPrecipitation of transparent or translucent pellets of ice, which are round or irregular, rarely conical, and which have a diameter of 0.2 inch (five millimeters), or less. There are two main types. Hard grains of ice consisting of frozen raindrops and pellets of snow encased in a thin layer of ice.\t\tIce stormLiquid rain falling and freezing on contact with cold objects creating ice build-ups of 1/4th inch or more that can cause severe damage.\t\tIce storm warningOlder terminology replaced by winter storm warning for severe icing. Issued when 1/2 inch or more of accretion of freezing rain is expected. This may lead to dangerous walking or driving conditions and the pulling down of power lines and trees. A warning is used for winter weather conditions posing a threat to life and property.\t\tIndian summerAn unseasonably warm period near the middle of autumn, usually following a substantial period of cool weather.\t\tInflow bands (or feeder bands)Bands of low clouds, arranged parallel to the low-level winds and moving into or toward a thunderstorm.\t\tInsolationIncoming solar radiation. Solar heating; sunshine.\t\tInstabilityA state of the atmosphere in which convection takes place spontaneously, leading to cloud formation and precipitation.\t\tIntermittent rainIntermittent rain stops and starts repeatedly, although not as abruptly or as frequently as showers. Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)The region where the northeasterly and southeasterly trade winds converge, forming an often continuous band of clouds or thunderstorms near the equator.InversionAn increase in temperature with height. The reverse of the normal cooling with height in the atmosphere. Temperature inversions trap atmospheric pollutants in the lower troposphere, resulting in higher concentrations of pollutants at ground levels than would usually be experienced.IridescenceBrilliant patches of green or pink sometimes seen near the edges of high- or medium-level clouds.Isentropic liftLifting of air that is traveling along an upward-sloping isentropic surface. Situations involving isentropic lift often are characterized by widespread stratiform clouds and precipitation.TopJet streamStrong winds concentrated within a narrow band in the upper atmosphere. It normally refers to horizontal, high-altitude winds. The jet stream often \"steers\" surface features such as front and low pressure systems.TopKatabaticWind blowing down an incline, such as down a hillside; downslope wind.KatafrontA front (usually a cold front) at which the warm air descents the frontal surface.Killing frostFrost severe enough to end the growing season. This usually occurs at temperatures below 28 degrees Fahrenheit. In Canada, a killing frost is described as a frost severe enough to destroy annual plants and new growth on trees (in the spring) or to end the growing season (in the fall).KnotA measure of speed. It is one nautical mile per hour (1.15 miles per hour). A nautical mile is one minute of one degree of latitude.TopLa Ni\u00f1aA cooling of the equatorial waters in the Pacific Ocean. Land breezeA wind that blows from the land towards a body of water. Also known as an offshore breeze. It occurs when the land is cooler than the water.LateFrom sunset (winter), from two hours before sunset (summer).LeewardSituated away from the wind; downwind - opposite of windward.Left MoverA thunderstorm which moves to the left relative to the steering winds and to other nearby thunderstorms; often the northern part of a splitting storm.LiftingThe forcing of air in a vertical direction by an upslope in terrain or by the movement of a denser air mass.Lifting condensation levelThe level in the atmosphere where a lifted air parcel reaches its saturation point, and as a result, the water vapor within condenses into water droplets.LightningAny form of visible electrical discharges produced by thunderstorms.LikelyIn probability of precipitation statements, the equivalent of a 60 or 70 percent chance.\tLowAn area of low pressure, usually accompanied by cyclonic and inward wind flow. Also known as a cyclone.Low cloudStratus, stratocumulus, cumulus and cumulonimbus.Low-level jetA region of relatively strong winds in the lower part of the atmosphere.\tTopMainly cloudyMore than half cloud cover but with some breaks in the cloud. It can also be described as cloudy with some sunny periods.Mainly sunnyMainly sunny means sunny with some cloudy periods. \tMammatus (or mamma clouds)These clouds appear as hanging, rounded protuberances or pouches on the under-surface of a cloud. With thunderstorms, mammatus are seen on the underside of the anvil. These clouds do not produce tornadoes, funnels, hail, or any other type of severe weather, although they often accompany severe thunderstorms.Maritime air massAn air mass that forms over water. It is usually humid, and may be cold or warm.Maximum temperatureThe highest temperature during a specified time period.Mean temperatureThe average of a series of temperatures taken over a period of time, such as a day or a month.Medium cloudAltostratus, altocumulus and nimbostratus.MeteorologyThe study of the physics, chemistry, and dynamics of the atmosphere and the direct effects of the atmosphere upon the Earth's surface, the oceans, and life in general.MildIn winter, mild refers to four to seven degrees Celsius above normal.Minimum temperatureThe lowest temperature during a specified time period.MistConsists of microscopic water droplets suspended in the air, which produces a thin grayish veil over the landscape. It reduces visibility to a lesser extent than fog. In Australia, it is described as similar to fog, but visibility remains more than a kilometer. Moderate riskSevere thunderstorms are expected to affect between five and 10 percent of the area.Moderate visibilityFive to 10 kilometers\u2019 visibility.MonsoonA persistent seasonal wind, often responsible for seasonal precipitation regime. It is most commonly used to describe meteorological changes in southern and eastern Asia.MorningSunrise to noon or midnight to noon depending on context.Mountain breezeSystem of winds that blow downhill during the night.MuggyColloquially descriptive of warm and especially humid weather.Multivortex tornadoA tornado in which two or more condensation funnels or debris clouds are present at the same time, often rotating about a common center or about each other. Multiple-vortex tornadoes can be especially damaging.MushroomA thunderstorm with a well-defined anvil rollover, and thus having a visual appearance resembling a mushroom.TopNight, overnightSunset to sunrise.No weather data availableNo weather information available for this time slot.NormalThe long-term average value of a meteorological element for a certain area. For example, \"temperatures are normal for this time of year\" Usually averaged over 30 years.TopOffshore breezeA wind that blows from the land towards a body of water. Also known as a land breeze.Offshore forecastA marine weather forecast for the waters between 60 and 250 miles off the coast.Onshore breezeA wind that blows from a body of water towards the land. Also known as a sea breeze.OutflowAir that flows outward from a thunderstorm.Outflow windsWinds that blow down fjords and inlets from the land to the sea.OvercastSky condition when greater than 9/10ths of the sky is covered by clouds. In Canada overcast means grey and dull skies, with extensive cloud cover.OverrunningA condition that exists when a relatively warm air mass moves up and over a colder and denser air mass on the surface. The result is usually low clouds, fog and steady, light precipitation.OzoneA form of oxygen in which the molecule is made of three atoms instead of the usual two. Ozone is usually found in the stratosphere, and responsible for filtering out much of the sun's ultraviolet radiation. It is also a primary component of smog.Ozone holeA thinning of the ozone layer over Antarctica, which occurs each spring.TopPartly cloudySky condition when between 3/10ths and 7/10ths of the sky is covered. Used more frequently at night. In the United Kingdom, it is defined as less than half cloud cover.Partly sunnySimilar to partly cloudy. Used to emphasize daytime sunshine.PermafrostA soil layer below the surface of tundra regions that remains frozen permanently.Polar airA mass of very cold, very dry air that forms in polar regions.Polar frontThe semi-permanent, semi-continuous front that encircles the northern hemisphere separating air masses of tropical and polar origin.Polar Stratospheric Clouds (PSCs)High altitude clouds that form in the stratosphere above Antarctica during the Southern Hemisphere winter. Their presence seems to initiate the ozone loss experienced during the ensuing southern hemisphere spring.Polar vortexA circumpolar wind circulation which isolates the Antarctic continent during the cold Southern Hemisphere winter, heightening ozone depletion.Poor visibilityOne to five kilometers\u2019 visibility.POPProbability of Precipitation. Probability forecasts are subjective estimates of the chances of encountering measurable precipitation at some time during the forecast period.Popcorn convectionClouds, showers and thundershowers that form on a scattered basis with little or no apparent organization, usually during the afternoon in response to diurnal heating.PrecipitationLiquid or solid water that falls from the atmosphere and reaches the ground.PressureThe force exerted by the interaction of the atmosphere and gravity. Also known as atmospheric pressure.Pressure changeThe net difference between pressure readings at the beginning and ending of a specified interval of time.Pressure falling rapidlyA decrease in station pressure at a rate of 0.06 inch of mercury or more per hour which totals 0.02 inches or more.Pressure rising rapidlyAn increase in station pressure at a rate of 0.06 inch of mercury or more per hour which totals 0.02 inches or more.Pressure tendencyThe character and amount of atmospheric pressure change during a specified period of time, usually the three-hour period preceding an observation.Prevailing westerliesWinds in the middle latitudes (approximately 30 degrees to 60 degrees) that generally blow from west to east.Prevailing windThe direction from which the wind blows most frequently in any location.Pulse stormA thunderstorm within which a brief period (pulse) of strong updraft occurs, during and immediately after which the storm produces a short episode of severe weather. These storms generally are not tornado producers, but often produce large hail and/or damaging winds. See overshooting top, cyclic storm.TopQualitative forecastsForecasts that provide only a categorical value for the predicted variable. Examples of this include \u201crain/no rain\u201d and \u201ccloudy/partly cloudy\u201d.Quantitative forecastsForecasts in which the \u201camount\u201d of the forecast variable is specified. Quantitative precipitation forecast (QPF)A forecast of rainfall, snowfall or liquid equivalent of snowfall.Quasi-biennial oscillation (QBO)Periodic variation in the direction, either easterly or westerly, of tropical lower stratospheric winds. The direction changes every 26 months.Quasi-nonhydrostatic (QNH) Pilots, air traffic control (ATC) and low frequency weather beacons use this pressure setting to refer to the barometric altimeter setting that causes the altimeter to read altitude above mean sea level within a certain defined region. Quasi-stationary front A front which is nearly stationary or moves very little since the last synoptic position. Also known as a stationary front.TopRadarAn instrument used to detect precipitation by measuring the strength of the electromagnetic signal reflected back. (RADAR= Radio Detection and Ranging).RadiationEnergy emitted in the form of electromagnetic waves. Radiation has differing characteristics depending upon the wavelength. Radiation from the Sun has a short wavelength (ultra-violet) while energy re-radiated from the Earth's surface and the atmosphere has a long wavelength (infra-red).Radiation fogFog produced over the land by the cooling of the lower atmosphere as it comes in contact with the ground. Also known as ground fog.RainLiquid water droplets that fall from the atmosphere, having diameters greater than drizzle (0.5 mm). In Canada the term \"rain\", used alone, means liquid precipitation of significant duration and extent.Rain gaugeAn instrument used to measure rainfall amounts.Rain showersRain showers stop and start suddenly and vary widely in intensity, and are gone in less than an hour.RainbowOptical phenomena when light is refracted and reflected by moisture in the air into concentric arcs of color. Raindrops act like prisms, breaking the light into the colors of a rainbow, with red on the outer, and blue on the inner edge.Relative humidityThe amount of water vapor in the air, compared to the amount the air could hold if it was totally saturated. It is expressed as a percentage.Return flowSouth winds on the back (west) side of an eastward-moving surface high pressure system. Return flow over the central and eastern United States typically results in a return of moist air from the Gulf of Mexico (or the Atlantic Ocean).RidgeAn elongated area of high pressure in the atmosphere. Opposite of a trough.River flood warningIssued when main stem rivers are expected to reach a level above flood stage.Roll cloudA relatively rare, low-level horizontal, tube-shaped accessory cloud completely detached from the cumulonimbus base. When present, it is located along the gust front and most frequently observed on the leading edge of a line of thunderstorms. The roll cloud will appear to be slowly \"rolling\" about its horizontal axis. Roll clouds are not and do not produce tornadoes.TopSandstormParticles of sand carried aloft by a strong wind. The sand particles are mostly confined to the lowest ten feet, and rarely rise more than fifty feet above the ground.SaturationA condition of the atmosphere in which a certain volume of air holds the maximum water vapor it can hold at a specific temperature.ScatteredA cloud layer that covers between 3/8ths and 1/2 of the sky.Scud cloudsSmall, ragged, low cloud fragments that are unattached to a larger cloud base and often seen with and behind cold fronts and thunderstorm gust fronts. Such clouds generally are associated with cool moist air, such as thunderstorm outflow.Sea breezeA wind that blows from a sea or ocean towards a land mass. Also known as an onshore breeze. It occurs when the land is warmer than the water.Sea-level pressureThe pressure value obtained by the theoretical reduction or increase of barometric pressure to sea-level.Secondary cold frontA front that follows a primary cold front and ushers in even colder air.Severe thunderstormA strong thunderstorm with wind gusts in excess of 58 mph (50 knots) and/or hail with a diameter of 3/4 inch or more.Shallow fogFog in which the visibility at 6 feet above ground level is 5/8ths of a mile or more.Shelf-cloudA low-level horizontal accessory cloud that appears to be wedge-shaped as it approaches. It is usually attached to the thunderstorm base and forms along the gust front.Short-fuse warningA warning issued by the National Weather Service for a local weather hazard of relatively short duration. Short-fuse warnings include tornado warnings, severe thunderstorm warnings, and flash flood warnings. Tornado and severe thunderstorm warnings typically are issued for periods of an hour or less, flash flood warnings typically for three hours or less.ShowerPrecipitation that is intermittent, both in time, space or intensity.Sky conditionThe state of the sky in terms of such parameters as sky cover, layers and associated heights, ceiling, and cloud types.SleetRain drops that freeze into ice pellets before reaching the ground. Sleet usually bounces when hitting a surface and does not stick to objects. Forms when snow enters a warm layer of air above the surface and melts and then enters a deep layer of sub freezing air near the surface and refreezes. In Australia, sleet refers to a mixture of rain and snow or falling snow that is melting into rain.Slight chanceIn probability of precipitation statements, usually equivalent to a 20 percent chance.Slight risk (of severe thunderstorms)Severe thunderstorms are expected to affect between two and five percent of the area. A slight risk generally implies that severe weather events are expected to be isolated.SmogPollution formed by the interaction of pollutants and sunlight (photochemical smog), usually restricting visibility, and occasionally hazardous to health.SmokeA suspension in the air of small particles produced by combustion. A transition to haze may occur when smoke particles have traveled great distances (25 to 100 statute miles or more) and when the larger particles have settled out and the remaining particles have become widely scattered through the atmosphere.\tSnowFrozen precipitation composed of ice particles in complex hexagonal patterns. Snow forms in cold clouds by the direct transfer of water vapor to ice.Snow burstVery intense shower of snow, often of short duration, that greatly restricts visibility and produces periods of rapid snow accumulation.Snow flurriesLight snow showers, usually of an intermittent nature and short duration with no measurable accumulation.Snow grainsLight snow showers, usually of an intermittent nature and short duration with no measurable accumulation. In Canada, Snow grains are described as minute, white and opaque grains of ice. When they hit hard ground, they do not bounce or shatter. They usually fall in very small quantities, and never in the form of a shower.Snow pelletsPrecipitation of white, opaque grains of ice. The grains are round or sometimes conical. Diameters range from about 0.08 to 0.2 inch (2 to 5 mm). In Canada, snow pellets are brittle and easily crushed; when they fall on hard ground, they bounce and often break up. They always occur in showers and are often accompanied by snowflakes or rain drops, when the surface temperature is around zero degrees Celsius.Snow showerSnow falling at varying intensities for brief periods of time. Some accumulation is possible.Snow squallsIntense, but of limited duration, periods of moderate to heavy snowfall, accompanied by strong, gusty surface winds and possible lightning. In Canada, it is described that a snow squall brings strong winds, flurries and poor visibility.SnowfallThe depth of new snow that has accumulated since the previous day or since the previous observation.SnowflakeWhite ice crystals that have combined in a complex branched hexagonal form.Special marine warningIssued for brief or sudden occurrence of sustained wind or frequent gusts of 34 knots or more. This is usually associated with severe thunderstorms or waterspouts.SprayAn ensemble of water droplets torn by the wind from an extensive body of water, generally from the crests of waves, and carried up into the air in such quantities that it reduces the horizontal visibility.SquallA strong wind characterized by a sudden onset in which the wind speed increases at least 16 knots and is sustained at 22 knots or more for at least one minute. In Canada, a squall is defined as a strong, sudden wind which generally lasts a few minutes then quickly decreases in speed. In Australia, it is described as a sudden increase of the mean wind speed which lasts for several minutes at least before the mean wind returns to near its previous value.StabilityAn indication of how easily a parcel of air is lifted. If the air is very stable it is difficult to make the parcel rise. If the air is very unstable the parcel may rise on its own once started.Stable airAir with little or no tendency to rise, usually accompanied by clear dry weather.Steam fogFog that is formed when water vapor is added to air which is much colder than the vapor's source. This is most common when very cold air drifts across relatively warm water.Steering winds (steering currents)A prevailing synoptic scale flow which governs the movement of smaller features embedded within it. StormIn marine usage, winds 48 knots (55 miles per hour) or greater.Storm surgeA rise of the sea level alone the shore that builds up as a storm (usually a hurricane) moves over water. It is a result of the winds of the storm and low atmospheric pressures.Storm warningA marine wind warning for sustained winds greater of 48 knots (55 miles per hour) or more from a non-tropical system.Straight line windsThunderstorm winds most often found with the gust front.Subtropical stormA low pressure system that develops in subtropical waters (north of 20 north degrees latitude) and initially has non-tropical features (see table below for a list of tropical features) but does have some element of a tropical cyclone's cloud structure (located close to the center rather than away from the center of circulation).SunnySunny or a few clouds means that less than half the sky has clouds.SupercellA severe thunderstorm whose updrafts and downdrafts are in near balance allowing the storm to maintain itself for several hours. Supercells often produce large hail and tornadoes.SupersaturationThe condition which occurs in the atmosphere when the relative humidity is greater than 100 percent.TopTemperatureA measure of the warmth or coldness of an object or substance with reference to a standard value.ThunderThe sound caused by a lightning stroke as it heats the air and causes it to rapidly expand.ThunderstormA storm with lightning and thunder produced by a Cumulonimbus cloud, usually producing gusty winds, heavy rain and sometimes hail. In Australia, they are described to be usually short-lived and hit on only a small area.\tTilted storm or tilted updraftA thunderstorm or cloud tower which is not purely vertical but instead exhibits a slanted or tilted character. It is a sign of vertical wind shear, a favorable condition for severe storm development.TodayUntil sunset. TomorrowMidnight to midnight.TonightSunset to midnight.TornadoA violent rotating column of air, in contact with the ground, pendant from a cumulonimbus cloud. A tornado does not require the visible presence of a funnel cloud. It has a typical width of tens to hundreds of meters and a lifespan of minutes to hours.Trade windsPersistent tropical winds that blow from the subtropical high pressure centers towards the equatorial low. They blow northeasterly in the northern hemisphere. \tTropical stormAn organized low pressure system in the tropics with wind speeds between 38 and 74 miles per hour. In Australia, it is a term used in the northern hemisphere for a tropical cyclone.Tropical storm warningA warning issued when sustained winds of 39 to 73 miles per hour (34 to 63 knots) are expected within 24 hours. TroughA warning issued when sustained winds of 39 to 73 mph (34 to 63 knots) are expected within 24 hours. In Canada, it is described as an elongated area of relatively low pressure extending from the centre of a region of low pressure. TroughA warning issued when sustained winds of 39 to 73 mph (34 to 63 knots) are expected within 24 hours. In Canada, it is described as an elongated area of relatively low pressure extending from the centre of a region of low pressure. TurbulenceA warning issued when sustained winds of 39 to 73 miles per hour (34 to 63 knots) are expected within 24 hours.TwisterA colloquial term for a tornado.TyphoonA hurricane that forms in the Western Pacific Ocean. It is a term used in Australia for a tropical cyclone in the northwestern Pacific with maximum winds above 117 kilometers per hour (63 knots).TopUnstable airAir that rises easily and can form clouds and rain.TopVery coolVery cool, in the summer, refers to more than seven degrees Celsius below normal.Very mildIn the winter, very mild means more than seven degrees Celsius above normal.TopWarmIn summer, warm refers to four to seven degrees Celsius above normal.Warm frontA narrow transitions zone separating advancing warmer air from retreating cooler air. The air behind a warm front is warmer and typically more humid than the air it is replacing.\t In Canada, it is defined as the trailing edge of a retreating cold air mass and moves in such a way that the warmer air replaces the colder air.WaveIn meteorology any pattern identifiable on a weather map that has a cyclic pattern or a small cyclonic circulation in the early stages of development that moves along a cold front. In Canada, A wave, in meteorology, is the intersection of warm and cold fronts.WeatherState of the atmosphere with respect to heat or cold, wetness or dryness, calm or storm, clearness or cloudiness. Also, weather is the meteorological day-to-day variations of the atmosphere and their effects on life and human activity. It includes temperature, pressure, humidity, clouds, wind, precipitation and fog.WindWind is the horizontal movement of air relative to the earth's surface and is caused by variations in temperature and pressure (for instance, air rises as it warms and a cool breeze moves in to take the place of the rising air.) Wind is also known as moving air.Wind chillThe additional cooling effect resulting from wind blowing on bare skin. The wind chill is based on the rate of heat loss from exposed skin caused by the combined effects of wind and cold. The (equivalent) wind chill temperature is the temperature the body \"feels\" for a certain combination of wind and air temperature.Winter stormA heavy snow event. A snow accumulation of more than six inches in 12 hours or more than 12 inches in 24 hours.Winter storm warningIssued when seven or more inches of snow or sleet is expected in the next 24 hours, or 1/2 inch or more of accretion of freezing rain is expected. A warning is used for winter weather conditions posing a threat to life and property.TopX-rayAn electromagnetic wave of very short wavelength, able to pass through many materials opaque to light.XenonAn inert gaseous chemical element, present in trace amounts in the air and used in some kinds of electric light.TopYellow windA strong, cold, dry west wind of eastern Asia that blows across the plains during winter and carries a yellow dust from the desert.YougA hot wind during unsettled summer weather in the Mediterranean.TopZonal flow A small amplitude pattern where winds blow mostly west-to-east.Zonal windWind blowing east-to-west or west-to-east.Zulu time The mean solar time for the meridian at Greenwich, England, used as a basis for calculating time in communications, military, aviation, maritime and other activities that cross time zones. Zulu time, which is also known as Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), is used internally among people working in the field of weather and meteorology, as well as among weather enthusiasts, for weather reports and forecasts. Sources: The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) National Weather Service, the Met Office in the United Kingdom, Canada\u2019s Weather Office, and the Australian Government Bureau of Meteorology.Topics:World Weather\u00a0Advertising You might also like When Is the Equinox?The Vernal (Spring) Equinox in the Northern Hemisphere is the Autumnal (Fall) Equinox in the Southern Hemisphere. moreiOS App: Time & Date Calculator Counting the days? Let our Time & Date Calculator App for iOS do the math for you. moreTry the Night Sky Map!Find and track planets in the sky with our new Interactive Night Sky Map. Point your mobile at the sky to follow an object, or play around with the timeline. more Worm Moon in MarchThe Full Moon in March is the Worm Moon. It is also called Lenten Moon, Crow Moon, Crust Moon, Chaste Moon, Sugar Moon, and Sap Moon. more Copyright \u00a9 Time and Date AS 1995\u20132019. All rights reserved. Feedback | About Us | Advertising | Disclaimer | Privacy | Sitemap", "Geocryological terminology We use cookies to make interactions with our website easy and meaningful, to better understand the use of our services, and to tailor advertising. For further information, including about cookie settings, please read our Cookie Policy . By continuing to use this site, you consent to the use of cookies.Got ittopSee all \u203a10 CitationsSee all \u203a15 ReferencesDownload citationShare Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Google+ RedditRequest full-textGeocryological terminologyArticle\u2002in\u2002Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences 13(6):862-867\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0February 2011\u2002with\u200211 ReadsDOI: 10.1139/e76-089 Cite this publication R. O. van EverdingenAbstractAmbiguity and inconsistent use of the word frozen and a number of related terms present problems in terminology describing permafrost and seasonal frost. To overcome some of these problems, the author proposes that use of the word 'frozen' be reserved exclusively for cases where at least some ice is present in the soil/water system. A new term, cryotic, is proposed to indicate that the temperature of the soil/water system is below 0 \u00b0C, without implying any phase conditions. Other terms dealt with are liquid water content, ice-rich, frost-sensitive, thaw-sensitive, frost-stable, and thaw-stable. A partially genetic terminology is proposed to describe various types of nonfrozen zones in permafrost areas.Do you want to read the rest of this article?Request full-text Citations (10)References (15)... However, cold caves, local Dead Ice or relict Ground Ice cannot be completely ruled out even in these areas depending on local microclimate and paleoglacial conditions. REFERENCES: Muller, 1943;van Everdingen, 1976;Kudryavtsev, 1978. ...... \u2022 Thermal Talik-a non-cryotic Talik, the temperature of which is above 0\u00b0C due to the local thermal regime of the ground; \u2022 Transient Talik-a Talik that is gradually being eliminated by freezing. REFERENCES: Williams, 1965;Washburn, 1973;van Everdingen, 1976. ...Gu\u00eda Terminol\u00f3gica de la Geocriolog\u00eda SudamericanaBookJan 2014 Dario Trombotto Pablo A. Wainstein Lukas U. ArensonView... Reports on the existence of cryopegs are sparse. While their discovery has been serendipitous, ground penetrating radar suggests that they are a common feature of permafrost systems, often found immediately above the permafrost base (Tolstikhin and Tolstikhin 1974; van Everdingen 1976). Only three such systems, all in Eastern Siberia, have been characterized for their microbial constituents (Gilichinsky et al. 2003; Pecheritsyna et al. 2007;Fig. ...Evidence for marine origin and microbial-viral habitability of sub-zero hypersaline aqueous inclusions within permafrost near Barrow, AlaskaArticleMar 2016FEMS Microbiol Ecol Jesse R Colangelo-Lillis Shelly D Carpenter Jody W Deming Hajo EickenCryopegs are subsurface hypersaline brines at sub-zero temperatures within permafrost; their global extent and distribution are unknown. The permafrost barrier to surface and groundwater advection maintains these brines as semi-isolated systems over geological time. A cryopeg 7 m below ground near Barrow, Alaska, was sampled for geochemical and microbiological analysis. Subsurface brines (in situ temperature of \u20136 \u00b0C, salinity of 115 ppt) and an associated sediment-infused ice wedge (melt salinity of 0.04) were sampled using sterile technique. Major ionic concentrations in the brine corresponded more closely to other (Siberian) cryopegs than to Standard seawater or the ice wedge. Ionic ratios and stable isotope analysis of water conformed to a marine or brackish origin with subsequent Rayleigh fractionation. The brine contained \u223c1000X more bacteria than surrounding ice, relatively high viral numbers suggestive of infection and reproduction, and an unusually high ratio of particulate to dissolved extracellular polysaccharide substances. A viral metagenome indicated a high frequency of temperate viruses and limited viral diversity compared to surface environments, with closest similarity to low water activity environments. Interpretations of the results underscore the isolation of these under-explored microbial ecosystems from past and present oceans.ViewShow abstract... Topographic inversions may take place numerous times before the supraglacial debris is finally deposited on the substrate, resulting in complex sediment assemblages consisting of faulted and folded fluvial, lacustrine and mass-movement deposits (Benn and Evans, 1998). Although the meltout phenomena represent a landscapeprocess(es ) response to climatic amelioration, caution should be exercised when using thermokarst to indicate the existence of permafrost since permafrost is defined purely by temperature (Van Everdingen, 1976) and not ground ice content. In addition, the identification of meltout phenomena highlights the need to clarify terminology used to define glacier karst and thermokarst. ...Spatial inventory of landforms in the recently exposed central highland of sub-Antarctic Marion IslandArticleFull-text availableMar 2008S AFR GEOGR J David William HeddingUntil recently, the Central Highland of sub-Antarctic Marion Island (above 750m a.s.l.) was covered by snow. Climatic amelioration is deemed responsible for the disappearance of the former permanent snowline which had a lower altitudinal limit of approximately 650m a.s.l. during the early-1950s. The recent sub-aerial exposure of this area now enables the geology and geomorphology to be documented. Mapping incorporated air-photo interpretation and field surveys using a hand-held Global Positioning System (GPS) to ensure spatial accuracy. Most grey lava outcrops above 750m a.s.l. exhibit some evidence of previous glaciations whereas black lava flows show no evidence of the effects of glaciers and must, therefore, post-date the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM). Frost processes currently predominate in the Central Highland, but there is a conspicuous lack of periglacial landforms (i.e. patterned ground) in scoria and grey lava areas. With the exception of thermal contraction cracking at one location, no other evidence for the development of geomorphological landforms in black lava areas exists. Other geomorphological landforms include meltout features, a manifestation of landscape process responses to climatic amelioration, mass movement landforms and the emergence of rudimentary aeolian landforms. Receding snow cover may enhance frost and aeolian processes, which could result in an interesting myriad of geomorphological landforms.ViewShow abstractQuaternary redox transitions in deep crystalline rock fractures at the western margin of the Greenland ice sheetArticleFull-text availableDec 2016APPL GEOCHEM Yann Lahaye Eva-Lena Tullborg Henrik Drake Juhani SuksiWhen planning for long term deep geological repositories for spent nuclear fuel knowledge of processes that will influence and change the sub-surface environment is crucial. For repositories in northern Europe and similar areas, influence from advancing and retreating continental ice sheets must be planned for. Rapid transport of meltwater into the bedrock may introduce oxic conditions at great depth, which may affect the copper canisters planned to encapsulate the spent fuel. The lack of direct observations has led to simplified modelling assumptions not reflecting the complexity of natural systems. As part of a unique field and modelling study, The Greenland Analogue Project, of a continental ice sheet and related sub-surface conditions, we here present mineralogical and U-series data unravelling the Quaternary redox history in the deep bedrock fracture system close to the margin of the Greenland ice sheet. The aim was to increase the understanding of circulation of potentially oxygenated glacial meltwater from the surface down to 650 m depth.ViewShow abstractHighly specialized microbial diversity in hyper-arid polar desertArticleFull-text availableJan 2010P NATL ACAD SCI USA Stephen B Pointing Donnabella Castillo Lacap-Bugler Roberta L. Farrell Yuki ChanViewR-01-56 A review of published literature on the effects of permafrost on the hydrogeochemistry of bedrockArticleFull-text available Svensk K\u00e4rnbr\u00e4nslehantering Gascoyne Geoprojects Inc M. GascoyneViewThe cryosphere and glacial permafrost as its integral componentArticleFull-text availableDec 2012 Wojciech Dobi\u0144skiSince Earth sciences have undertaken studies of other celestial bodies, its various fields have moved beyond the scope of study assigned to them by name. Interest in space makes it necessary to abandon research geocentrism and reverse relations when comparing the structure of the Earth with other celestial bodies. As an exceptional place in the universe, it should not be the Earth which constitutes a reference point, especially in cryospheric research, but rather the other celestial bodies of our planetary system. This approach, referred to as \u201cSpatial Uniformitarianism,\u201d is the basis for determining the place of ice in the environment and for assigning it to the lithosphere. Ice can be penetrated by frost just as other minerals and rocks, so the occurrence of permafrost may yet be attributed to glaciers and ice-caps. In the article, the occurrence of glacial permafrost has been worked out on the basis of a thermal classification of glaciers with a thorough understanding of the phenomenon. This allows us to specify permafrost\u2019s presence beneath glaciers and ice-caps, a concept which had been needlessly vague. Further, by considering rock glaciers as a mixture of two types of rocks, and by understanding the importance of movement in their evolution, we are now closer to fruitfully determining their role in the environment, their geomorphological significance.ViewShow abstractThe central scenario for SITE-94. A Climate Change ScenarioBookFull-text availableJan 1995 Fritz Kautsky L.M. KING-CLAYTON N.A. Chapman Emmanuel LedouxThe central scenario includes the following main components: a deterministic description of the most probable climatic state for Sweden (with special ref. to the Aespoe area) for the next c. 120,000 years, a description of the likely nature of the surface and geological environment in the area at each stage of the climate sequence selected, and quantitative information on how these changes might affect the disposal system. The climate models suggest glacial maxima at c. 5, 20, 60 and 100 thousand years from now. The Aespoe region is predicted to be significantly affected by the latter three glacial episodes, with the ice sheet reaching and covering the area during the latter two episodes (by up to c 2200m and 1200m thickness of ice, resp.). Permafrost thicknesses over the next 120,000 years have been calculated. Assumptions, estimates and alternatives to the prescribed climate evolution are discussed. Following definition of a realistic, albeit non-unique, climate sequence, the objective of scenario development is to provide an indicator of the physical, chemical and hydrogeological conditions at the front of and beneath the advancing and retreating ice sheets, with the aim of identifying critical aspects for Performance Assessment modelling. The effect of various factors, such as ice loading, development of permafrost, temperature changes and sea level changes are considered in terms of their impact on hydrogeology, groundwater chemistry, rock stress and surface environments. 183 refsViewShow abstractPointing SB, Chan Y, Lacap DC, Lau MC, Jurgens JA.. Highly specialized microbial diversity in hyper-arid polar desert. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106: 19964-19969ArticleFull-text availableOct 2009Proc Natl Acad Sci Unit States Am Stephen B Pointing Donnabella Castillo Lacap-Bugler Roberta L. Farrell Yuki ChanThe McMurdo Dry Valleys in Antarctica are a cold hyperarid polar desert that present extreme challenges to life. Here, we report a culture-independent survey of multidomain microbial biodiversity in McKelvey Valley, a pristine example of the coldest desert on Earth. We demonstrate that life has adapted to form highly-specialized communities in distinct lithic niches occurring concomitantly within this terrain. Endoliths and chasmoliths in sandstone displayed greatest diversity, whereas soil was relatively depauperate and lacked a significant photoautotrophic component, apart from isolated islands of hypolithic cyanobacterial colonization on quartz rocks in soil contact. Communities supported previously unreported polar bacteria and fungi, but archaea were absent from all niches. Lithic community structure did not vary significantly on a landscape scale and stochastic moisture input due to snowmelt resulted in increases in colonization frequency without significantly affecting diversity. The findings show that biodiversity near the cold-arid limit for life is more complex than previously appreciated, but communities lack variability probably due to the high selective pressures of this extreme environment.ViewShow abstractGeomorphology and geomorphological responses to climate change in the interior of sub-Antarctic Marion IslandArticleJan 2007 David William HeddingThesis (M. Sc.(Geography))--University of Pretoria, 2006. Includes bibliographical references. Adobe Acrobat Reader needed to open files.ViewShow abstractPermafrost or permanently frozen ground and related engineering problemsArticle S. MullerViewSOME GEOPHYSICAL AND HYDROLOGICAL ASPECTS OF PERMAFROST IN THE CORNWALLIS ISLAND AREA, N. W. T.ArticleJan 1974 J.M. Hamilton R.F. BurnsResistivity and permafrost data at Polaris and three other sites on Cornwallis and Little Cornwallis Islands as well as fluid loss in drilling operations at Polaris are discussed. Table and appended graphs show data.ViewShow abstractDescription and classification of frozen soilsArticleJan 1966 K.A. Linell C.W. KaplarViewGroundwater in permafrost regions; an annotated bibliographyArticleJan 1965 J. WilliamsViewEffects of Salt Concentration Changes During Freezing on the Unfrozen Water Content of Porous MaterialsArticleFeb 1974WATER RESOUR RES Duwayne M. Anderson Amos BaninBy combining equations for salt concentration by water removal from porous bodies with those for freezing point depression in normal solutions, equations are developed for calculating freezing point depression shifts due to the gradual removal of water upon freezing in porous bodies. The same equations can be used for the calculation of shifts in the osmotic potential of the water in drying porous bodies by using a simple conversion factor. Graphs relating the remaining water content to the freezing point shift for various initial soluble salt contents are given. Good agreement is found between the measured freezing point depression shifts for a silty clay soil treated with three concentrations of sodium chloride and with dimethyl sulfoxide at various contents of unfrozen water and the calculated values. The order of magnitude of the shifts expected in various natural conditions is discussed.ViewShow abstractStability of slopes in frozen soilArticleApr 1975Int J Rock Mech Min Sci Geomech Abstr N.R. Morgenstern E.C. McrobertsViewPermafrost TerminologyArticleJan 2010 R. J. E. Brown W. O. KupschThe steadily expanding economic developments in northern Canada, accompanied by increasing permafrost investigations for science and engineering, have intensified the need for standarized terminology. The primary list of more than 300 terms was reduced to 184 terms, of which 146 were to be defined and 38 cross-referenced to the defined terms. Added to these for a total of 237 items, were 53 items which are inverse word order listings to achieve alphabetical groupings of related terms. Examples are the \"ice' terms, such as aggradational ice and buried ice, which are listed as ice, aggradational and ice, buried; and the \"permafrost' terms such as contemporary permafrost and continuous permafrost, which are listed as permafrost, contemporary and permafrost, continuous. -from AuthorsViewShow abstractDownloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by Huazhong University of Science and Technology on 06J CanSciCan. J. Earth Sci. Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by Huazhong University of Science and Technology on 06/04/13 For personal use only.Groundwater in permafrost regions of CanadaJan 197483-93Van EverdingenVAN EVERDINGEN, R. 0. 1974. Groundwater in permafrost regions of Canada. In: Permafrost hydrology, Proc. Workshop Seminar, 1974. Can. Nat. Comm. Int. Hy-drol. Decade, pp. 83-93.Temperature and heat flux measurements through permafrost as a geophysical toolJan 197417-27A M JessopA S JudgeJESSOP, A. M. and JUDGE, A. S. 1974. Temperature and heat flux measurements through permafrost as a geophysical tool. Proc. Symp. Permafrost Geophys., Nat. Res. Counc. Can., Tech. Memo. No. 113, p. 17-27.Frost and permafrost definitionsJan 1955107-1F HennionHENNION, F. 1955. Frost and permafrost definitions. U.S. Nat. Res. Counc., Highway Res. Board, Washington, D.C., HRD Bull. 1 1 1, pp. 107-1 10.Permafrost or permanently frozen ground and related engineering problems Under-ground cryopegs on Soviet Arctic Island Shelf and Is-lands. In: Groundwater in the cryolithosphereJan 1945146-150S W MullerY V NeizvestnovYu P SemenovMULLER, S. W. 1945. Permafrost or permanently frozen ground and related engineering problems. US Army, Office, Chief of Engineers, Mil. Intelligence Div., Spec. Rep., Strategic Eng. Study 62,231 p. NEIZVESTNOV, Y. V. and SEMENOV, Yu. P. 1973. Under-ground cryopegs on Soviet Arctic Island Shelf and Is-lands. In: Groundwater in the cryolithosphere. (N. I. Tolstikhin and 0. N. Tolstikhin, Eds.) US Army Cold Regions Res. Eng. Lab. Draft Trans]. 437, pp. 146-150.Sulphur springs at Gypsum HillJan 1961183-187R E BeschelBESCHEL, R. E. 1963. Sulphur springs at Gypsum Hill. Axel Heiberg Island Res. Rep., McGill Univ., Montreal, Que., Prelim. Rep. 1961-1962, pp. 183-187.Jan 1963481-487ConfConf. 1963, US Nat. Acad. Sci. -US Nat. Res. Counc., Washington, D.C., Pub. No. 1287, pp. 481-487.Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by CONCORDIA UNIV on 12~ J CanEarthSci~. Can. J. Earth Sci. Downloaded from www.nrcresearchpress.com by CONCORDIA UNIV on 12/10/14 For personal use only.AdJoin ResearchGate to find the people and research you need to help your work.15+ million members118+ million publications700k+ research projectsJoin for freeRecommended publicationsDiscover more publications, questions and projects in TerminologyArticleKryosphere - hydrosphere relationshipJanuary 2011 Wojciech Dobi\u0144skiH2O is a substance that only on the Earth exists in three phases: solid, liquid and gaseous. On other celestial bodies known to us it does not occur in a tri-phase state. An analysis of the definitions of water, ice, hydrosphere and the kryosphere shows that in this context they lack cohesion. Alongside ice, with its varied material forms in nature, another constituent of the kryosphere is ... [Show full abstract] temperature. Those two elements create the kryosphere. Their characterization in consequence is the characterization of ice and permafrost presented in the aforementioned context. This new book discusses the kryosphere in detail, including its relationship with the hydrosphere.Read moreArticleFull-text availableVariations of the water ice and the bound water in the surficial soil layer of the Martian seasonal...January 2010G. MitrofanovP. H. Christensen Ruslan Kuzmin[...]E. V. ZabaluevaView full-textArticleFrost peat mounds on Hermansen\u00f8ya (Oscar II Land, NW Svalbard) \u2013 their genesis, age and terminologyOctober 2012 \u00b7 BoreasTomasz JaworskiW\u0142adys\u0142aw NiewiarowskiHere we present research on previously uninvestigated frost peat mounds occurring on a peat bog in the southern part of Hermansen\u00f8ya, NW Svalbard. Detailed characteristics are given of the environmental conditions of the peat bog and of the morphological features and surface structure of the frost peat mounds, as well as an analysis of the internal structure of one mound. Three types of frost ... [Show full abstract] peat mounds have been distinguished: disc\u2010shaped mounds (low), mid\u2010sized mounds with gentle sides, and high mounds with steep sides. Radiocarbon dating of the peat within the frost peat mound performed for the first time on Svalbard and a detailed analysis of the deposits demonstrated that in the high mound (1.3 m) there is an ice\u2010peat core and peat cover without ice. There are three layers of peat of different ages separated by at least two hiatuses. A generalized history of the development of the peat bog from about 8 ka BP is established. The studied mound displays two development cycles unknown elsewhere. The older relict part of the peat mound was formed during a climatic cooling about 3.0\u20132.5 ka BP, while the younger part originated during the Little Ice Age (c. AD 1550\u20131850). Despite certain similarities of these mounds to some palsas, this term should not be applied to the mounds because they are smaller and their cores consist mostly of layers of massive injection ice, the presence of which indicates a pressurized system in their genesis.Read moreArticleFull-text availablePermafrost Distribution, Zonation and Stability along the Eastern Ranges of the Cordillera of North...January 1986 Stuart Arthur HarrisConsiderable quantities of new data have become available recently regarding the nature and distribution of permafrost along the eastern ranges of the Cordillera. These are used to produce an elevation view of permafrost in the ranges north of the 35\"N parallel. In the south, there is a zone of sporadic permafrost up to 1000 m in vertical extent overlain by continuous permafrost. The zone of ... [Show full abstract] discontinuous permafrost (3040% of the surface with permafrost) is only about 70 m in vertical extent. North of 54\"N this changes, with discontinuous permafrost encroaching on the sporadic permafrost zone. The apparent permafrost boundaries differ from those of Brown (1967), Pkwk (1983a) and Cheng Guodong (1983). Their work was based on considerably less data, and it is clear that the terrain factors of mean winter snow depth, local moisture and ground water conditions, the distribution of the different air masses and cold air drainage have considerable effect locally, causing undulations and abrupt changes in the lower limit of the permafrost boundaries to about 56\"N. Farther north, the climatic factors become dominant. The lower boundaries are different for a given latitude in North America and China. Subdivision of the alpine permafrost into stable, metastable and unstable classes is useful in indicating the instability of alpine permafrost (Cheng Guodong, 1983) and shows that most of the permafrost found in mainland Canada and Alaska is unstable or metastable.View full-textDiscover moreLast Updated: 14 Jan 2019Download citationWhat type of file do you want? RIS BibTeX Plain TextWhat do you want to download? Citation only Citation and abstractDownloadLooking for the full-text?You can request the full-text of this article directly from the authors on ResearchGate.Request full-textAlready a member? Log inorDiscover by subject areaRecruit researchersJoin for freeLoginEmail Tip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inor log in withWelcome back! Please log in.Email \u00b7 HintTip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inor log in withNo account? Sign upAboutNewsCompanyCareersSupportHelp centerFAQBusiness solutionsRecruitingAdvertisingAd\u00a9 ResearchGate 2019. All rights reserved.ImprintTermsPrivacy", "Glossary of Weather Terms HOME FORECAST Local Graphical Aviation Marine Rivers and Lakes Hurricanes Severe Weather Fire Weather Sun/Moon Long Range Forecasts Climate Prediction Space Weather PAST WEATHER Past Weather Heating/Cooling Days Monthly Temperatures Records Astronomical Data SAFETY Floods Tsunamis Beach Hazards Wildfire Cold Tornadoes Fog Air Quality Heat Hurricanes Lightning Safe Boating Rip Currents Thunderstorms Space Weather Sun (Ultraviolet Radiation) Safety Campaigns Wind Drought Winter Weather INFORMATION Owlie's Kids Page Wireless Emergency Alerts Brochures Weather-Ready Nation Cooperative Observers Daily Briefing Damage/Fatality/Injury Statistics Forecast Models GIS Data Portal NOAA Weather Radio Publications SKYWARN Storm Spotters StormReady TsunamiReady Service Change Notices EDUCATION Be A Force of Nature NWS Education Home NEWS NWS News Events Social Media Pubs/Brochures/Booklets NWS Media Contacts SEARCH Search For NWS All NOAA ABOUT About NWS Organization Strategic Plan For NWS Employees International National Centers Careers Contact Us Glossary Local forecast by \"City, St\" or ZIP code Sorry, the location you searched for was not found. Please try another search. Multiple locations were found. Please select one of the following: Location Help News Headlines Spring Edition of Weather Watcher Newsletter 2019 Weather Spotter Training - Republic & Lewiston Customize Your Weather.gov Enter Your City, ST or ZIP Code Remember Me Privacy Policy LOADING... Spokane, WA Weather Forecast Office Glossary of Weather Terms Weather.gov > Spokane, WA > Glossary of Weather Terms Current Hazards Current Outlooks Submit Report Detailed Hazards Daily Briefing Current Conditions Observations Precipitation Local Storm Reports (When Available) Additional Observations Page Satellite Storm Reports Map Webcams Radar National Local Regional Forecasts Local Area Forecast Discussion Aviation Weather Fire Weather Severe Weather Hurricane Center User Defined Area Evapotranspiration Travel Activity Planner Experimental HeatRisk Marine Fire Weather Spot Request/Monitor Forecast models Lake Pend Oreille Model Rivers and Lakes River Observations (Map) Hydrology / River Climate and Past Weather Local National Drought More... Climate Portal Local Programs Outreach and Education Spotter Program Weather Safety Watch/Warning & Advisory Def'n. Additional Information Seasonal Links Today in Weather History Our Office Interested in Applying? Contact Us APPENDIX B - GLOSSARY OF WEATHER TERMS THUNDERSTORM TERMS Anvil\u00a0- The spreading out (by strong winds) of the upper portion of the thunderstorm. It usually has a fibrous or smooth appearance. With long-lasting thunderstorms, the anvil may spread more than 100 miles downwind. Cumulus cloud\u00a0- a cauliflower-shaped cloud with a flat base and sharp edges. Tufts are rising columns of air condensing. As the cloud and cloud droplets grow in size, the base will begin to gray. Downburst\u00a0- A sudden rush of cool air toward ground that can impact with speeds greater than 70 mph and produce damage similar to that of a tornado. It usually occurs near the leading edge of the storm or may occur in heavy rain. Viewing the damage from the air does not reveal evidence of a twisting motion or convergence toward a central track, like it would for a tornado. Downdraft\u00a0- A column of cool air that sinks toward the ground. It is most often accompanied by rain. Flanking line\u00a0- A line of cumulus clouds connected to and extending outward from the most active portion of a parent cumulonimbus, usually found on the southwest (right, rear) side of a storm. The cloud line has roughly a stair-step appearance with the taller clouds adjacent to the parent cumulonimbus. It is most frequently associated with strong or severe thunderstorms. Funnel cloud\u00a0- a funnel-shaped cloud extending from a towering cumulus or thunderstorm. It is associated with a rotating column of air that has condensed to form a cloud. Gust front\u00a0- the leading edge of the thunderstorm's downdraft of air as it spreads out away from the storm. It is usually felt as a change to gusty cool winds and often precedes the thunderstorm's rain by several minutes. Hail\u00a0- Precipitation in the form of balls or clumps of ice. Hook echo\u00a0- A radar pattern sometimes observed in the southwest (right, rear) quadrant of a tornadic thunderstorm. The rain echo forms the hook pattern as air rotates around the strong updraft. The updraft is the hollow portion of the hook (looks like a backwards \"J\" or a 6) and is where the tornado would most likely be found (if the storm were to produce one). This signature is in the radar reflectivity field; Doppler radar's velocity information can help confirm the presence of a tornado, especially when a hook echo exists in the reflectivity field. Macroburst\u00a0- A larger downburst affecting an area greater than 2.5 km in diameter. Mammatus\u00a0(or mamma clouds) - these clouds appear to be hanging, rounded protuberances or pouches on the underside of the cloud. With thunderstorms, they are usually seen under the anvil and often accompany severe thunderstorms. Microburst\u00a0- A small downburst affecting an area less than 2.5 km in diameter. Precipitation shaft\u00a0- a visible column of rain or hail falling from the base of the cloud. Rain-free base\u00a0- the dark underside of a cloud (its base) that has no visible precipitation falling from it. This marks the updraft of a thunderstorm. Roll cloud\u00a0- on rare occasions, a shelf cloud may turn into a roll cloud. The motions of the warm air riding up and over the cool air moving down and under creates a swirling of air or an eddy. The cloud takes on the shape of a horizontal tube that appears to be rolling. It is detached from the thunderstorm on its leading edge. Scud clouds\u00a0- Low cloud fragments often seen in association with and behind thunderstorm gust fronts. These clouds are ragged and wind torn and are not usually attached to the thunderstorm. By the untrained, these can be misinterpreted as tornadoes, since they can hang low to the ground. Severe thunderstorm\u00a0- A thunderstorm producing damaging winds (trees down, etc.) or winds 58 mph or more and/or hail three-quarter of an inch or greater in diameter. Shelf cloud\u00a0- a low-level, wedge-shaped cloud attached to the thunderstorm. It forms above the gust front as warm air ahead of the storm rides over the cool outflow from the thunderstorm. Squall line\u00a0- a solid line or band of active thunderstorms. Thunderstorm\u00a0(cumulonimbus) - the towering cumulus cloud has continued to grow in height and width and now lightning is occurring. The storm may extend 5 to 10 miles high into the atmosphere and 5 to 25 miles across. Heavy rain and gusty winds often accompany the storms. Tornado\u00a0- a violently rotating column of air in contact with the ground and extending to the thunderstorm base, often seen extending from near the wall cloud. It can be a few yards across to a mile wide. Towering cumulus cloud\u00a0- a cumulus cloud that continues to grow so that its height is taller than or equal to its width. It is the first stage toward growing into a thunderstorm. It may be producing a shower. Updraft\u00a0- Warm, moist, rising air. As the air rises, it condenses into a visible cumulus or cumulonimbus cloud. The updraft fuels the storm. In an ordinary thunderstorm, air rises at 40 mph and in a severe thunderstorm speeds may reach more than 100 mph. Wall cloud\u00a0- this cloud appears as an abrupt lowering of the cloud base from the relatively flat rain-free base. It is attached to a thunderstorm and may be rotating. This is the portion of the thunderstorm from which the tornado often descends. FLOOD TERMS Bankfull\u00a0- the maximum height of the river before it overflows its banks. Being above bankfull does not necessarily mean that it causes damage (it depends on the particular river and what development exists along it). Coastal Flood\u00a0- high tides, persistent onshore winds, or a hurricane storm surge can cause flooding along coastal areas. Flash Flood\u00a0- a flood that occurs suddenly during or shortly following heavy rains or from a sudden release of water (as in a dam break). Small streams and creeks usually react the fastest to heavy rains and rise several feet in hours or even minutes. Flash floods can also be caused by ice jams. Flood Crest\u00a0- the highest height that the river reaches during a flood event. Flood Stage\u00a0- the height of the river at which property damage begins to occur. Often differs from bankfull. The river may overflow its banks into flood plain without reaching flood stage. River Flood\u00a0- a flood on a large river such as the Connecticut takes a tremendous amount of rain and usually develops over a period of one to two days. Rain water first runs into the small streams which flow into the larger branches and eventually end up in the main stem of the river. Urban Flood\u00a0- pavement which causes rapid runoff (rain can't soak into the ground so it runs downhill) and poor drainage can lead to flooded roadways and underpasses and even become deadly. WINTER WEATHER TERMS Blizzard\u00a0- strong winds (greater than 35 mph) and heavy snow or blowing snow combine to produce very poor visibility. There no longer is a temperature criterion for a blizzard. Blowing snow\u00a0- Wind-driven snow that causes reduced visibility and sometimes significant drifting. Blowing snow may be snow that is falling or snow that was once loose on the ground and picked up by the wind. Drifting snow\u00a0- winds are strong enough to blow falling snow or loose snow on the ground into mounds causing uneven snow depths. The wind carries the snow near the ground causing no restriction to visibility. Freeze\u00a0- used when temperatures at or near the surface (ground) are expected to be 32 F degrees or colder. Sometimes used with adjectives \"Killing,\" \"severe,\" or \"hard\". A freeze may or may not be accompanied by frost. Freezing drizzle\u00a0- drizzle that falls onto a surface with a temperature below freezing causing it to freeze to the surface forming a thin coating of ice or rime. Drizzle is a very light precipitation with little accumulation, but even a small amount of ice can sometimes cause a problem. Freezing rain\u00a0- rain that falls onto a surface with a temperature below freezing causing it to freeze to the surface, forming a coating of ice or glaze. Frost\u00a0- the formation of ice crystals in the forms of scales, needles, feathers, or fans, which develop under conditions similar to dew, except that the minimum temperature has dropped to at least 32 F degrees. (The 32 F sometimes is only at the plant level, while shelter temperatures (higher up) reporting 35 F, for example.) Frostbite\u00a0- frozen body tissue. Heavy snow\u00a0- Snow accumulating to at least 6 inches in 12 hours. These values are less couple (4 inches in 12 hours or 6 inches in 24 hours) in more southern portions of the country, where snowfall is not as common as in New England. Hypothermia - a medical emergency: when the body temperature drops below 95 F. Ice storm\u00a0- significant and possibly damaging accumulations of ice are expected during freezing rain situations. Significant ice accumulations are usually accumulations of \u00bd inch or greater, but may vary from region to region across the country. Sleet\u00a0- ice pellets or granules of frozen rain. Occurs when rain falls into a layer of air with temperatures below freezing. Sleet usually bounces when hitting a surface and does not stick, but can accumulate on roadways causing a hazard to motorists. Snow\u00a0- A prediction of snow indicates a steady fall of snow for several hours or more. It may be modified by terms such as \"light,\" \"intermittent,\" or \"occasional\" to indicate lesser intensity or periodic snow. Snow flurries\u00a0- light snow falling for short durations. No accumulation to a light dusting (or trace) is expected. Snow showers\u00a0- snow falling at varying intensities for brief time periods. Some accumulation is possible. Snow squalls\u00a0- brief, intense snow showers, accompanied by strong, gusty winds. Accumulations may be significant. Wind chill\u00a0(Wind chill index) - an apparent temperatures which takes into account the combined effect of lowering temperatures and the rate of heat loss from a human body, caused by the wind. As the wind increases, heat is carried away from a person's body at a more accelerated rate, driving down the body temperature. Follow us on Twitter Follow us on Facebook Follow us on YouTube OTX RSS Feed US Dept of Commerce National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration National Weather Service Spokane, WA2601 N Rambo Rd.Spokane, WA 99224509-244-0110Comments? Questions? Please Contact Us. Disclaimer Information Quality Help Glossary Privacy Policy Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) About Us Career Opportunities", "Permafrost Terminology We use cookies to make interactions with our website easy and meaningful, to better understand the use of our services, and to tailor advertising. For further information, including about cookie settings, please read our Cookie Policy . By continuing to use this site, you consent to the use of cookies.Got ittopSee all \u203a12 CitationsSee all \u203a42 ReferencesDownload citationShare Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Google+ RedditRequest full-textPermafrost TerminologyArticle\u2002in\u2002Biuletyn Peryglacjalny 32\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0January 2010\u2002with\u200220 ReadsCite this publication R. J. E. Brown W. O. KupschAbstractThe steadily expanding economic developments in northern Canada, accompanied by increasing permafrost investigations for science and engineering, have intensified the need for standarized terminology. The primary list of more than 300 terms was reduced to 184 terms, of which 146 were to be defined and 38 cross-referenced to the defined terms. Added to these for a total of 237 items, were 53 items which are inverse word order listings to achieve alphabetical groupings of related terms. Examples are the \"ice' terms, such as aggradational ice and buried ice, which are listed as ice, aggradational and ice, buried; and the \"permafrost' terms such as contemporary permafrost and continuous permafrost, which are listed as permafrost, contemporary and permafrost, continuous. -from AuthorsDo you want to read the rest of this article?Request full-text Citations (12)References (42)Does climate change and plant phenology research neglect the Arctic tundra?ArticleFull-text availableSep 2018 Catherine M. D. Fauvelle Tyler D. Jessen Marco M. Musiani Rianne A. E. DiepstratenPhenology, the annual timing of naturally recurring events in animals and plants, is exhibiting significant changes in response to climate change. Drastic shifts in the timing of plant activity have been observed in high\u2010latitude environments in particular, which are exposed to the greatest amount of warming. Taking into consideration the importance of plant growth and seasonal availability for the whole ecosystem, we would hope that ample research is conducted on the impacts of climate change on plant phenology in the Arctic tundra. We provide a geographic and temporal overview of research relating to impacts of climate change on plant phenology and investigate whether the Arctic tundra is receiving the research attention that appears warranted due to the rapid warming and large expected changes in this biome. We conducted a literature search for articles using the Institute for Scientific Information Web of Science and evaluated focus on biomes, and temporal trends for 2000\u20132015. We found that the tundra was one of the least researched biomes, when compared to all other biomes. Proportional to the land surface the tundra covers, significantly less research in North America has been devoted to this biome than expected, while profusion of research in Europe was as expected. Additionally, we found that in the past sixteen years, despite the increase in the number of articles published relating to climate change and plant phenology, the proportion of the research devoted to the tundra decreased over time. Our findings also indicate that more work is being done on plant phenology and climate change in lower latitudes. We suggest that the results of this analysis are due to three non\u2010insurmountable obstacles (access, expense, and complexity) and provide practical suggestions for increased investment in climate change and plant phenology research in the otherwise neglected Arctic tundra.ViewShow abstractLateral transport of sediment and organic matter, derived from coastal erosion, into the nearshore zone of the southern Beaufort Sea, CanadaThesisFull-text availableMar 2017 Gregor PfalzHerschel Basin is a natural depression on the southern Beaufort Shelf, which is located in the western Canadian Arctic between the Mackenzie Delta and the Alaskan border. The submarine basin of late Wisconsin age is a natural sediment trap for material eroded along the Yukon coast and through its unique position within the area also a valuable paleoenvironmental archive. During a field campaign in spring 2016, a thirteen meter long sediment core was obtained from the Herschel Basin. The aim of this Master\u2019s thesis was to quantify the amount of carbon, nitrogen and sediment with terrestrial origin throughout the sediment column from the Herschel Basin. The increasing research effort to understand the dynamics of Arctic coasts is justified by their contribution to the global carbon budget and their vulnerability. The results showed that the majority of sediment found in the sediment column of the Herschel Basin could be assigned to a mix of riverine and terrestrial/coastal inputs. However, the individual percentage of each input (marine, fluvial and terrestrial) could not be distinguished, due to lack of data. In conclusion, this thesis showed that in the Arctic nearshore zone coastal erosion affected by climate change will definitely have a negative impact on \u201c[\u2026] climate feedbacks, on nearshore food webs, and on local communities, whose survival still relies on marine biological resources\u201d(M. Fritz et al., 2017).ViewShow abstractKryosphere - hydrosphere relationshipArticleJan 2011 Wojciech Dobi\u0144skiH2O is a substance that only on the Earth exists in three phases: solid, liquid and gaseous. On other celestial bodies known to us it does not occur in a tri-phase state. An analysis of the definitions of water, ice, hydrosphere and the kryosphere shows that in this context they lack cohesion. Alongside ice, with its varied material forms in nature, another constituent of the kryosphere is temperature. Those two elements create the kryosphere. Their characterization in consequence is the characterization of ice and permafrost presented in the aforementioned context. This new book discusses the kryosphere in detail, including its relationship with the hydrosphere.ViewShow abstractGenesis, Morphology, Age and Distribution of Cryogenic Mounds on Kaffi\u00f8yra and Hermansen\u00f8ya, Northwest SvalbardArticleJun 2015 Karol Chutkowski Tomasz JaworskiThree main types of cryogenic mounds on the coastal plains (strandflats) of Kaffi\u00f8yra and Hermansen\u00f8ya on northwest Svalbard are distinguished according to their distribution, morphology, internal structure, genesis and age. The mounds include aggradational forms: a previously unrecognised hydraulic pingo, frost peat mounds with either a minerogenic core (mineral palsas) or an ice/ice-peat core, and earth hummocks. Previously unrecognised degradational features represent thermokarst mounds. Individual types of mounds have developed in different geomorphological locations: (i) in the forefield of a retreating subpolar glacier over fault zones (hydraulic pingo 7.8 m high); (ii) on peat bogs (two types of frost peat mounds 0.7\u20131.3 m high and thermokarst mounds 0.5\u20130.8 m high); (iii) on raised beaches (high earth hummocks 0.5\u20131.0 m high); and (iv) on flat and wet tundra surfaces (miniature earth hummocks 0.2\u20130.3 m high). Although large, pingo-type mounds are typical on Svalbard, only one pingo occurs in the study area because of lithological, hydrological and geomorphological conditions of the area. These conditions, together with thick permafrost, do not allow the outflow of sub- and intra-permafrost water to the surface. Some cryogenic mounds are the result of climate fluctuations in the recent part of the Holocene (Little Ice Age). The oldest frost peat mounds from Hermansen\u00f8ya developed 3.0\u20132.5 kyr BP, while the pingo is still growing. Copyright \u00a9 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.ViewShow abstractFrost peat mounds on Hermansen\u00f8ya (Oscar II Land, NW Svalbard) \u2013 their genesis, age and terminologyArticleOct 2012BOREAS Tomasz Jaworski W\u0142adys\u0142aw NiewiarowskiHere we present research on previously uninvestigated frost peat mounds occurring on a peat bog in the southern part of Hermansen\u00f8ya, NW Svalbard. Detailed characteristics are given of the environmental conditions of the peat bog and of the morphological features and surface structure of the frost peat mounds, as well as an analysis of the internal structure of one mound. Three types of frost peat mounds have been distinguished: disc\u2010shaped mounds (low), mid\u2010sized mounds with gentle sides, and high mounds with steep sides. Radiocarbon dating of the peat within the frost peat mound performed for the first time on Svalbard and a detailed analysis of the deposits demonstrated that in the high mound (1.3 m) there is an ice\u2010peat core and peat cover without ice. There are three layers of peat of different ages separated by at least two hiatuses. A generalized history of the development of the peat bog from about 8 ka BP is established. The studied mound displays two development cycles unknown elsewhere. The older relict part of the peat mound was formed during a climatic cooling about 3.0\u20132.5 ka BP, while the younger part originated during the Little Ice Age (c. AD 1550\u20131850). Despite certain similarities of these mounds to some palsas, this term should not be applied to the mounds because they are smaller and their cores consist mostly of layers of massive injection ice, the presence of which indicates a pressurized system in their genesis.ViewShow abstractPeriglacial mass-wasting landforms on Mars suggestive of transient liquid water in the recent past: Insights from solifluction lobes on SvalbardArticleMar 2012Icarus Dennis Reiss Andreas Johnsson Mats Olvmo E. HauberViewPermafrostArticleOct 2011EARTH-SCI REV Wojciech Dobi\u0144skiSince its introduction, the definition of permafrost has rarely been discussed or reviewed. Recent decades have brought a series of significant, often interdisciplinary works on a periglacial zone and permafrost as well as their relation with other components of the environment, especially with glaciers. They show that, despite its unequivocal definition, the term has lost its sharpness and explicitness with regard to some aspects of research. The article presents a current state of understanding of permafrost phenomenon, regarding the use of the term permafrost, which means a physical state, not a material thing. Processes which it undergoes, that is exclusively aggradation and degradation, and also the possibility of its occurrence in glacial and periglacial environments of geographical space, where it covers over a quarter of land area on the Earth.ViewShow abstractPermafrost Distribution, Zonation and Stability along the Eastern Ranges of the Cordillera of North AmericaArticleFull-text availableJan 1986 Stuart Arthur HarrisConsiderable quantities of new data have become available recently regarding the nature and distribution of permafrost along the eastern ranges of the Cordillera. These are used to produce an elevation view of permafrost in the ranges north of the 35\"N parallel. In the south, there is a zone of sporadic permafrost up to 1000 m in vertical extent overlain by continuous permafrost. The zone of discontinuous permafrost (3040% of the surface with permafrost) is only about 70 m in vertical extent. North of 54\"N this changes, with discontinuous permafrost encroaching on the sporadic permafrost zone. The apparent permafrost boundaries differ from those of Brown (1967), Pkwk (1983a) and Cheng Guodong (1983). Their work was based on considerably less data, and it is clear that the terrain factors of mean winter snow depth, local moisture and ground water conditions, the distribution of the different air masses and cold air drainage have considerable effect locally, causing undulations and abrupt changes in the lower limit of the permafrost boundaries to about 56\"N. Farther north, the climatic factors become dominant. The lower boundaries are different for a given latitude in North America and China. Subdivision of the alpine permafrost into stable, metastable and unstable classes is useful in indicating the instability of alpine permafrost (Cheng Guodong, 1983) and shows that most of the permafrost found in mainland Canada and Alaska is unstable or metastable.ViewShow abstractSome mechanical aspects of pingo growth and failure, western Arctic coast, CanadaArticleFeb 2011Can J Earth Sci J. Ross MackayMany closed-system pingos are underlain by sub-pingo water lenses, and the same is probably true of numerous open-system pingos. In the early growth stage the bending of the frozen overburden of a pingo by a sub-pingo water lens can be compared to the bending of a thin elastic plate. Although the assumptions of elastic plate theory do not apply fully to a growing pingo, because time-dependent plastic and creep deformation are involved, the application of elastic plate theory nevertheless helps to explain the peripheral normal faulting and spring flow of pingos, summit failure, the ease with which elongated pingos appear to collapse, and the changing roles played by the radius and overburden thickness of pingos from early growth to the cessation of growth.ViewShow abstractGeocryological terminologyArticleFeb 2011Can J Earth Sci R. O. van EverdingenAmbiguity and inconsistent use of the word frozen and a number of related terms present problems in terminology describing permafrost and seasonal frost. To overcome some of these problems, the author proposes that use of the word 'frozen' be reserved exclusively for cases where at least some ice is present in the soil/water system. A new term, cryotic, is proposed to indicate that the temperature of the soil/water system is below 0 \u00b0C, without implying any phase conditions. Other terms dealt with are liquid water content, ice-rich, frost-sensitive, thaw-sensitive, frost-stable, and thaw-stable. A partially genetic terminology is proposed to describe various types of nonfrozen zones in permafrost areas.ViewShow abstractPeriglacial markers within the Late Pleistocene loess-paleosol sequences in Poland and Western UkraineArticleApr 2009QUATERN INT Zdzislaw JaryStratigraphic loess\u2013palaeosol sequences represent exceptional, climate-controlled, terrestrial records of interglacial\u2013glacial cycles. One of the most spectacular features within the northern part of the European loess belt is the occurrence of well-preserved relicts of the periglacial structures. From a variety of periglacial structures, three types are especially useful to reconstruct the former periglacial environment: cryogenic wedges with primary mineral infilling, cryoturbation and gelifluction structures; and ice-wedge casts. These structures form well-distinguishable horizons within loess\u2013palaeosol sequences and their stratigraphic positions are not random. Periglacial horizons recorded in the Late Pleistocene loess\u2013palaeosol sequences in the study area were formed as a result of extreme climatic conditions and/or rapid environmental changes during cold events of the Last Glacial period. These horizons are noted in almost all investigated sections, and thus they can be used as stratigraphic markers. The number of periglacial horizons and their morphological features vary, depending on their geographical settings and local conditions. The periglacial record indicates the occurrence of four main cold stages during the Last Glacial period. Two earlier stages are recorded in the last interglacial\u2013early glacial palaeosol complex. Their onset was probably rapid. These short cold periods can be correlated with MIS 5d and 5b. The next two periglacial stages most probably correspond with MIS 4 and 2. Only during the last two stages were ice-wedges formed in the northern zone of the investigated loess area. This record indicates the twofold expansion and disappearance of the permafrost during the Last Glacial period.ViewShow abstractDynamic process model of palsa genesis and development based on geomorphologic investigations at the Boundary Ridge Palsa Bog near Schefferville, QuebecArticle David CarlsonNumerical simulation of forming processes has been an important means for material selection, tool design, and process optimization. A critical component of simulation, however, is an accurate material constitutive model, describing the response of the material under possible modes of deformation. The accuracy, in turn, is linked to the tests and techniques applied for identification of constitutive models: the more elaborate the identification, the more reliable the material parameters. For textile composites, uncontrollable factors such as contact friction, misalignment, slip, variations in local fiber volume, and tow compaction are sources that generate considerable scatter in the response of fabrics. Accordingly, characterization methods occasionally suffer from non-repeatability of test data even under similar testing conditions. Furthermore, it is typical that different deformation modes result in different sets of material parameters. If variance of material response within the replication of tests and deformation modes is neglected, then the identification of model parameters can be far from the true material behavior. In order to confront the above shortcomings, this work is an attempt to elaborate on the characterization of textile composites using a new inverse method by means of a signal-to-noise weighting scheme, and two constitutive models by means of a phenomenological invariant-based approach. A full identification of the developed constitutive models for a typical woven fabric is applied using the introduced inverse method and a set of data from standard testing methods, with close attention to the behavior of the composite constituents in a macro level. Particularly, the effects of fiber-resin interactions and fiber misalignment are introduced. A novel modified picture frame test is also studied and used for validating the models. From the results of this work, it is expected that the use of a number of test methods simultaneously and the inclusion of all the data generated from them may not only be useful, but can also be critical for better characterization of this class of materials. La simulation num\u00e9rique pour les proc\u00e9d\u00e9s de formation est un instrument important pour le choix des mat\u00e9riaux, la conception d'outils et l'optimisation des proc\u00e9d\u00e9s. Un des composants critiques de la simulation reste cependant un mod\u00e8le constitutif de mat\u00e9riaux pr\u00e9cis, pouvant d\u00e9crire la r\u00e9ponse du mat\u00e9riau sous des modes de d\u00e9formation possibles. Par ailleurs, l'exactitude est li\u00e9e aux essais et aux techniques appliqu\u00e9s pour l'identification des mod\u00e8les constitutifs: plus l'identification est raffin\u00e9e, plus les param\u00e8tres du mat\u00e9riau sont fiables. Pour des compos\u00e9s textiles, des facteurs incontr\u00f4lables tels que le frottement de contact, la d\u00e9viation d'alignement, le glissement, les variations de volume local des fibres, et le tassement des fibres sont des sources qui produisent un \u00e9parpillement consid\u00e9rable dans la r\u00e9ponse des tissus. Par cons\u00e9quent, les m\u00e9thodes de caract\u00e9risation souffrent occasionnellement de la non-r\u00e9p\u00e9tabilit\u00e9 des donn\u00e9es des essais m\u00eame lorsque les conditions d'essais sont semblables. De plus, il est typique que diff\u00e9rents ensembles de param\u00e8tres du mat\u00e9riau soient obtenus \u00e0 partir des diff\u00e9rents modes de d\u00e9formation. Si la variance de la r\u00e9ponse du mat\u00e9riau dans les r\u00e9pliques d\u2019essais et les modes de d\u00e9formation est n\u00e9glig\u00e9e, l'identification des param\u00e8tres du mod\u00e8le peut alors \u00eatre loin du v\u00e9ritable comportement du mat\u00e9riau. Afin de confronter les imperfections mentionn\u00e9es ci-dessus, la pr\u00e9sente \u00e9tude est une tentative d'\u00e9laboration de la caract\u00e9risation des compos\u00e9s textiles en utilisant une nouvelle m\u00e9thode inverse bas\u00e9e sur un sch\u00e9ma pond\u00e9r\u00e9 signal/bruit et deux mod\u00e8les constitutifs par le biais d\u2019une approche bas\u00e9e sur l\u2019invariance des ph\u00e9nom\u00e8nes. Une identification compl\u00e8te des mod\u00e8les constitutifs d\u00e9velopp\u00e9s est appliqu\u00e9e \u00e0 un tissu typique en utilisant la m\u00e9thode inverse propos\u00e9e et un ensemble de donn\u00e9es obtenus \u00e0 partir des m\u00e9thodes d'essais standards, avec une attention particuli\u00e8re donn\u00e9e aux comportements des compos\u00e9s \u00e0 un niveau macroscopique. En particulier, les effets des interactions fibre-r\u00e9sine et la d\u00e9viation d'alignement de fibres sont introduits. Un nouveau test de cadrage modifi\u00e9 est \u00e9galement \u00e9tudi\u00e9 et employ\u00e9 pour valider les mod\u00e8les. Des r\u00e9sultats de ce travail, on s'attend \u00e0 ce que l'utilisation d'un certain nombre de m\u00e9thodes d'essais simultan\u00e9s et la prise en compte de toutes les donn\u00e9es produites puissent non seulement \u00eatre utiles, mais \u00e9galement \u00eatre critiques pour une meilleure caract\u00e9risation de cette classe de mat\u00e9riaux.ViewShow abstractSouthern limit of permafrost features in peat landforms, Manitoba and SaskatchewanArticleJan 1971 S.C. ZoltaiViewSome estimates of the thermal effects of a heated pipeline in permafrostArticleJan 1970 A.H. LachenbruchViewPermafrost or permanently frozen ground and related engineering problemsArticle S. MullerViewSegregated epigenetic ice and slumps in permafrost, Mackenzie Delta area, N.W.TArticleJan 1966 J.R. MackayViewDescription and classification of frozen soilsArticleJan 1966 K.A. Linell C.W. KaplarViewGroundwater in permafrost regions; an annotated bibliographyArticleJan 1965 J. WilliamsViewEffect of permafrost upon cultivated fieldsArticleJan 1954 T.L. P\u00e9w\u00e9ViewOrigin, composition and structure of perenially frozen ground and ground ice: a reviewArticleJan 1973 R. Black J. MackayViewPingos of the Pleistocene Mackenzie Delta areaArticleJan 1962 J.R. MackayViewProperties of a Wooded Palsa in Northern ManitobaArticleApr 1971Arctic Alpine Res C. Tarnocai S. C. ZoltaiA palsa complex, 106 m in diameter, having a maximum height of 224 cm above the water table is described in detail. Permafrost occurred under the elevated, densely wooded palsa, extending into the underlying clay. The height of doming was largely due to ice accumulation in the clay and peat. The thickness of the active layer was least under the densest black spruce stands and greatest in the openings. The cumulative depth of snow was greatest in openings and least in dense stands. The volumetric moisture content of the peat in the active layer was about 30% in the fall, but this figure nearly doubled in the winter; the moisture content of the frozen core remained constant at over 90%. The peat material was largely mesic sedge peat near the bottom with mesic forest peat closer to the surface.ViewShow abstractClassification of patterned ground and review of suggested originsArticleJan 1956GEOL SOC AM BULL, GSA Bulletin A. L. WASHBURNPatterned ground, which occurs principally in polar, subpolar, and alpine regions, is broadly classified into sorted and nonsorted varieties of circles, nets, polygons, steps, and stripes. This descriptive classification and the associated terminology eliminate confusion resulting from the many overlapping and synonymous terms in the literature. The origin of patterned ground is far from satisfactorily explained. Hypotheses are reviewed and summarized according to dominant processes as follows: (1) ejection of stones from fines by multigelation (often-repeated freezing and thawing), (2) mass heaving, (3) local differential heaving, (4) cryostatic movement (movement by frost-generated hydrostatic pressure), (5) circulation due to ice thrusting, (6) frost wedging, (7) absorption of water by colloids, (8) weathering, (9) contraction due to drying, (10) contraction due to low temperature, (11) contraction due to thawing, (12) convection due to temperature-controlled density differences, (13) convection due to moisture-controlled density differences, (14) movement due to moisture-controlled changes in intergranular pressure, (IS) differential thawing and eluviation, (16) vibration, (17) artesian flow, (18) rillwork (for stripes), (19) solifluction in combination with one or more of the above processes (for stripes). Conclusions regarding origin are that: (1) the origin of most forms of patterned ground is uncertain; (2) patterned ground is polygenetic; (3) some forms may be combination products in a continuous system having different processes as end members; (4) climatic and terrain interpretation of patterned ground, both active and \"fossil\", is limited by lack of reliable data about formative processes. With respect to future research, it is apparent that: (1) laboratory experiments, including cold-room studies specifically dealing with patterned ground, are urgently required; (2) excavations rather than surface observations should be stressed in the field; (3) physicists, pedologists, plant ecologists, and engineers versed in soil mechanics have much to contribute to patterned-ground research, and joint work between them and geologists should produce particularly valuable results.ViewShow abstractGround Water in Permafrost Regions of AlaskaArticleJan 1970 J. R. WilliamsViewDevelopment of palsas in Finnish LaplandArticleJan 1968 M SalmiViewOriented Lakes of Northern AlaskaArticleJan 1949 Robert F. Black William L. BarksdaleThe oriented lakes of northern Alaska occur in an area of more than 25,000 square miles in the Arctic Coastal Plain Province. The topography, drainage, vegetation, climate, geology, and permafrost of the area are briefly described. The average range of orientation of the lakes is 12\u00b0-from N. 9\u00b0 W. to N. 21\u00b0 W. In any locality the deviation from the average is commonly less than 3\u00b0 and rarely over 5\u00b0. The lakes range in size from small ponds, a few tens of feet in length, to large lakes more than 9 miles long and 3 miles wide. The shapes may be described as elliptical, cigar-shaped, rectangular, ovoid, triangular, irregular, or compound. One group of lakes has a shallow shelf or underwater bench surrounding a deeper central portion. The rest are shallow throughout, and the underwater profile is commonly concave. The major outline of the lakes is smoothly curved, but in detail it is cuspate or jagged. No lacustrine beach ridges were recognized. Former lake basins, now drained, and extensions of the present lakes are evidenced by shore features, lacustrine deposits, the character of polygonal ground, and vegetation. The effect of wind, vegetation, and permafrost are briefly described. The lakes are compared with the Carolina Bays and with rectangular lakes in eastern U.S.S.R. Many of the lakes are believed to be the result of thawing of permafrost; others may be produced by the segmentation of uplifted lagoons. The origin of some is not known.ViewShow abstractBogs and Fens in the Hudson Bay LowlandsArticleJan 1959 Hugo Sjorsty of metal ions in water of precipitation (except in definitely maritime areas) leads to strongly acid reactions both of the water and of the peat in most ombrotrophic peatlands. The vegetation of the ombrotrophic peat- lands, or (in a restricted sense) bogs, is highly specialized, acidophilous, and poor in species of flowering plants. Other types of peatland receive varying quantities of water from mineral soils in addition to precipitation. This water percolates through the surroundings of the peatland and acquires varying amounts of mineral ions in passing through the soil. This minerotrophic peatland is generally termed fen. The minerotrophic influence in the fens always results in a richer and more varied vegetation largely composed of species not present in bogs. This indicates a somewhat better nutritional status and less acid conditions than in the bogs. Some fens are circumneutral and rich in species. Extreme types of these \"rich fens\" have a high calcium content and abound in calciphilous plants, but there are also fens in which the minerotrophic influence is not sufficient to inhibit the development of a fairly acid reaction; in these the vegetation generally belongs to the \"poor fen\" type (intermediate between \"rich fen\" and bog). Even in regions in which they are extensive, peatlands occur mostly as individual bodies that are confined to depressions. The shapes of the peatland bodies are mainly determined by the configuration of the under- lying and surrounding mineral stratum; their hydrotopography is also dependent on climatic factors. Conditions may vary considerably in differ- ent parts of the same peatland. For instance, parts of the surface may be ombrotrophic and other parts of it more or less minerotrophic. Such peatland complexes ere classified as entities -by Cajander in his classicViewShow abstractSoils of the Okpilak River Region, AlaskaArticleMay 1966 Jerry BrownConcepts of Arctic pedology are applied to the glaciated and unglaciated terrains in the vicinity of the Okpilak River, northeastern Alaska. Two types of frost action in Arctic soils are considered: (1) the surficial configurations or patterned ground, and (2) the morphological characteristics of the seasonally thawed soil and the upper zone of perennially frozen ground. About 55 types of soil conditions and surface features are described and mapped in an area encompassing both the northern Brooks Range and the southern Foothill Provinces. These include the genetic soils of Arctic Alaska, numerous soil conditions, and many of the common sorted and nonsorted circles, nets, polygons, steps, and stripes. In the glaciated and periglacial areas, sorted features predominate on the coars-textured substrata. The Arctic brown soils are distributed on the well-drained sites along valley traverses and across mountain gradients. On a sequence of valley moraines, acid parent material is considered more important than time and mesoenvironments in influencing the depth and development of the characteristic brown solum. Weakening of the soil-forming processes with increasing altitude is suggested in the mountains. In the valleys, a podzol-like soil is observed in close proximity to the Arctic brown soils and in association with acid parent materials, dwarf birch-heath vegetation and protected microrelief positions. A combination of peaty soils associated with icewedge polygons constitutes an organic terrain. The developments of these soils under the Arctic environment are discussed. (Author)ViewShow abstractPhysiographic notes on features in the Mackenzie Delta areaArticleMar 2008 J. Keith FraserEvidence is presented to show that a group of knobby hills on coalescing alluvial fans along the Richardson Mountains is landslide debris rather than glacial deposit, Associated with the debris are pingo-like features and lenses of ground ice. A heavy layer of silt over remnant snowbanks is attributed to wind deposition.ViewShow abstractThermokarst in Siberia and Its Influence on the Development of Lowland ReliefArticleSep 1970QUATERNARY RES Tade\u00e1\u0161 Czudek Jaromir Demek\u201cThermokarst\u201d as a process is the melting of ground ice and the consequent formation of depressions. Thermokarst landforms depend on the tectonic regime of a region, the ground ice content, and the degree to which the permafrost equilibrium is disturbed. Thermokarst forms are especially prominent in the lowlands of the subnival region with permafrost. The authors distinguish two modes of thermokarst development\u2014permafrost back-wearing and down-wearing\u2014based on their investigations in Siberia. The first mode is characteristic of a more dissected relief. In this case permafrost back-wearing takes place and the process is characterized by development of gullies, thermocirques, and parallel retreat of steep walls with ice veins, resulting in a lower lowland level. The second mode of thermokarst development is due to permafrost melting from above and is typical of a flat undissected relief, mainly that of watershed regions. characteristic forms are depressions with steep slopes and flat floors (alases). Thermokarst valleys develop through coalescence of alases. Thermokarst processes destroy the lowland relief of large areas and create characteristic forms resulting in a lower lowland level. Thus thermokarst represents a special type of lowland development in permafrost conditions.ViewShow abstractThermal conductivity of frozen soilsArticleJun 1970CAN J EARTH SCI E. PennerThermal conductivity measurements of two frozen soils, Leda clay and Sudbury silty clay, taken at temperatures between 0 and -22 degrees C by means of a thermal probe and a transient heat flow technique, compare favorably with estimates of thermal conductivity calculated by the DeVries method. Both measured and estimated values show a similar trend of increasing thermal conductivity as the temperature is lowered and the ice content grows. This increase is associated with the high thermal conductivity of ice compared with that of water. Des essais sur la conductivit\u00e9 thermique de deux sols gel\u00e9 s \u00e0 des temp\u00e9ratures variant entre 0 et -22 degr\u00e9s C, ont \u00e9 t\u00e9 faits \u00e0 l'aide d'une sonde thermique et de la m\u00e9thode de transfert de chaleur en r\u00e9gime variable. Les r\u00e9sultats se comparent favorablement avec les estim\u00e9s de la conductivit\u00e9 thermique calcul\u00e9e selon la m\u00e9thode de DeVries. Les valeurs estim\u00e9es et mesur\u00e9es indiquent une tendance \u00e0 une augmentation de la conductivit\u00e9 thermique \u00e0 mesure que la temp\u00e9rature est abaiss\u00e9e et que la teneur en glace augmente. Cette augmentation peut \u00eatre reli\u00e9e \u00e0 la conductivit\u00e9 thermique plus \u00e9lev\u00e9e de la glace par rapport \u00e0 celle de l'eau. RESViewShow abstractSoil moisture distribution by ice lensing in freezing soilsArticleJan 1972 E. PennerThe purpose of this review paper is to draw attention to the moisture redistribution process induced by frost action and to indicate the type of investigations that have been carried out to understand the phenomenon. The importance of the ice lensing mechanism, the influence of pore and particle size on heaving pressure, and the influence of the thermal regime during freezing on moisture redistribution are special aspects that have been emphasized. Le but de la pr\u00e9sente \u00e9tude est d'attirer l'attention au ph\u00e9 nom\u00e8ne de redistribution de l'humidit\u00e9 du sol caus\u00e9e par le gel et de signaler le genre de recherches qui ont \u00e9t\u00e9 entreprises afin d'expliquer le ph\u00e9nom\u00e8ne. Enfin on a insist\u00e9 sur l'importance du m\u00e9canisme des lentilles de glace, l'influence de la dimension des pores et des particules sur la pression de soul\u00e8vement et l'influence du r\u00e9gime thermique en p\u00e9riode de gel sur la redistribution de l'humidit\u00e9. RESViewShow abstractComparison of permafrost conditions in Canada and the USSRArticleSep 1967 R. J. E. BrownHalf of the area of Canada and the USSR is covered by permafrost. Differences in climatic and topographic conditions result in major dissimilarities between the permafrost areas of the two countries. Almost all of Canada was covered during the Pleistocene by a continental ice sheet, whereas only local ice caps were formed in Siberia. The permafrost regions of the USSR extend further south than in Canada, although Canada has a greater area of permafrost in the Arctic. The mean annual air temperature is the same in both countries, but Siberia experiences slightly colder winters and warmer summers. There are also differences in the botanical and pedological conditions. All these factors contribute to the formation of a thicker and more extensive permafrost layer in the USSR than in Canada. La moiti\u00e9 de la superficie du Canada et de celle de l'URSS est recouverte par le perg\u00e9lisol. Des diff\u00e9rences de conditions climatiques et topographiques entra\u00eenent d' importantes dissimilarit\u00e9s entre les aires \u00e0 perg\u00e9lisol des deux nations. La quasi-totalit\u00e9 du Canada a \u00e9t\u00e9 recouverte au pl\u00e9istoc\u00e8ne par une calotte glaciaire continentale, alors que des glaciers locaux seulement se sont form\u00e9s en Sib\u00e9 rie. Les r\u00e9gions \u00e0 perg\u00e9lisol s'y \u00e9tendent plus loin vers le sud qu'au Canada, mais de dernier en a une plus grande superficie dans l'arctique. La moyenne annuelle des temp\u00e9 ratures de l'air est la m\u00eame dans les deux pays, mais la Sib\u00e9 rie endure des hivers un peu plus froids et des \u00e9t\u00e9s plus chauds. Il existe \u00e9galement des diff\u00e9rences dans les conditions botaniques et p\u00e9dologiques. Tous ces facteurs contribuent \u00e0 la formation d'un perg\u00e9lisol plus \u00e9pais et plus \u00e9tendu en URSS qu'au Canada. RESViewShow abstractProperties and Behaviour of Freezing SoilsArticleJan 1968 P. J. WilliamsThe characteristics behaviour and properties of frozen soils arise because ice and water coexist under the condtiions imposed by the porous structure of the soil. The results of an investigation into the relative amounts of ice and water in frozen soils led to a series of related studies, described in the present volume, each of which was suggested by the conclusions arising from the preceding one. RESViewShow abstractTemperature Regime of Permafrost under Different Geographical and Geological ConditionsArticleJan 1967 N.A. GraveInternational Conference on Low Temperature Science. I. Conference on Physics of Snow and Ice, II. Conference on Cryobiology. (August, 14-19, 1966, Sapporo, Japan)ViewShow abstractPermafrost, Climafrost, and the Muskeg H Factor159-178MontrealMcgillQueenR J E Brown(Ed.):Montreal,McGill-Queen's Brown, R.J .E., 1966. Permafrost, Climafrost, and the Muskeg H Factor: in Proc. Eleventh Muskeg Research Conf., Assoc. Committee Soil and Snow Mechanics, Natl. Res. Council, Tech. Memo. 87, p. 159-178Earth and Icc Mounds: A Terminological Discussion: in Pewe, Troy L., The Periglacial Environment: Montreal, Arctic Inst203-215J LundqvistLundqvist, J., 1969. Earth and Icc Mounds: A Terminological Discussion: in Pewe, Troy L., The Periglacial Environment: Montreal, Arctic Inst. North America and McGill-Queen's University Press, p. 203- 215Le Periglaciaire par I'Imagc; Illustrated Glossary of Periglacial Phenomena: Quebec, Presses de I'Univcrsite Laval, Centre dpL-E HamelinF A CookHamelin, L-E. and Cook, F.A., 1967. Le Periglaciaire par I'Imagc; Illustrated Glossary of Periglacial Phenomena: Quebec, Presses de I'Univcrsite Laval, Centre d'Etudes Nordiques, Travaux et Documents No.4, 237 pGuide to a Field Description of Permafrost: Assoc. Committee Soil and Snow MechanicsJan 1963J A PihlainenG H JohnstonPihlainen, J.A., and Johnston, G.H., 1963. Guide to a Field Description of Permafrost: Assoc. Committee Soil and Snow Mechanics, Natl. Res. Council of Canada, Tech. Memo. 79, 21 p.Normal Freezing and Thawing Degree-Days for Canada 1931-1960: Atmospheric EnvironmentJan 19734-73D W BoydBoyd, D.W., 1973. Normal Freezing and Thawing Degree-Days for Canada 1931-1960: Atmospheric Environment, Environment Canada, CLl4-73, 38 p.Massive Ice and Icy Sediments Throughout the Tuktoyaktuk Peninsula, Richards Island, and Nearby Areas, District of MackenzieJan 197171-92V N RamptonJ R MackayRampton, V.N. and Mackay, J.R., 1971. Massive Ice and Icy Sediments Throughout the Tuktoyaktuk Peninsula, Richards Island, and Nearby Areas, District of Mackenzie: Geol. Surv. Can. Paper 71-21, 16 p.Permafrost and Related Engineering Problems in AlaskaJan 1969O J FcrriansI JrFcrrians, O.J. Jr., et a I., 1969. Permafrost and Related Engineering Problems in Alaska: U.S. Geol. Survey Prof. Paper 678, 37 p.Some of the polygons in the foreground still have small depressions in the centre, and ate in the transitional stage from low to high centre polygons . The water in the troughs is 30 to 60 em deep. The average polygon is about 8 to 12 metres ill diameterN W TuktoyaktukFigure 19. Polygon, high centre. Mainly high centre polygons near Tuktoyaktuk, N.W.T. in continuous permafrost zone. Some of the polygons in the foreground still have small depressions in the centre, and ate in the transitional stage from low to high centre polygons. The water in the troughs is 30 to 60 em deep. The average polygon is about 8 to 12 metres ill diameter. (Reproduced with permission of l.R. Mackay, Department of Geography, University of British Colurnbia.)The Growth of PingosJan 1973979-1004------, 1973. The Growth of Pingos, Western Arctic Coast, Canada: Canadian Jour. Earth Sci., Vol. 9, No.6, p. 979-1004.Geocryology and EngineeringJan 1969119-185A E CorteCorte, A.E., 1969. Geocryology and Engineering: Geol. Soc. Arn., Reviews in Engineering Geology II, p. 119-185.Observations on Pingos: Natl. Research Council CanadaJan 1963845-847F MullerMuller, F., 1963. Observations on Pingos: Natl. Research Council Canada, Tech. Transl. 1073, 117 p. , 1968. Pingos, Modern: p. 845-847. In: Encyclopedia of Geomorphology, R.W. Fairbridge, Ed., Reinhold Book Corp., 1295 p,Offshore Permafrost and Ground IceJan 19721550-1561-----, 1972a. Offshore Permafrost and Ground Ice. Southern Beaufort Sea, Canada: Canadian Jour. Earth Sci., Vol. 9, No. 11, p. 1550-1561.Peatland Terminology: A List of Terms and Definitions: Environment Canada, Cdn. Forestry ServiceW StanekStanek, W., in prep. Peatland Terminology: A List of Terms and Definitions: Environment Canada, Cdn. Forestry Service.Jan 1970103-120T CzudekJ DernekCzudek, T. and Dernek, J., 1970. Thermokarst in Siberia and its Influence on the Development of Lowland Relief: Quaternary Res., Yol. I, p. 103-120.Classification of Peat Landforms in ManitobaJan 1970C TarnocaiTarnocai, c., 1970. Classification of Peat Landforms in Manitoba: Winnipeg, Canada Dept. Agric. Research Sta. Pedological Unit, 45 p.Jan 1966159-178R J E BrownBrown, R.J.E., 1966. Permafrost, Climafrost, and the Muskeg H Factor: in Proc. Eleventh Muskeg Research Conf., Assoc. Committee Soil and Snow Mechanics, Na tl. Res. Council, Tech. Memo. 87, p. 159-178.Review of Certain Properties and Problems of Frozen Ground, including Permafrost: U.S. Army, Corps of Engineers, Snow, Icc and Permafrost Research EstablishmentJan 1953C W LovellJrM HerrinLovell, C.W. Jr., and Herrin, M., 1953. Review of Certain Properties and Problems of Frozen Ground, including Permafrost: U.S. Army, Corps of Engineers, Snow, Icc and Permafrost Research Establishment, Rept. 9, 124 p.Characteristics of the Active Layer in the Permafrost Region of Canada: ill Proc. Seminar on Permafrost Active LayerApr 19711-7------, 1971. Characteristics of the Active Layer in the Permafrost Region of Canada: ill Proc. Seminar on Permafrost Active Layer, May 1971. Assoc. Committee Geotech. Research Natl. Res. Council. Tech. Memo. 103, p. 1-7.Frost and Permafrost Definitions: U.S. Natl. Research CouncilF HcnnionHcnnion, F., 1955. Frost and Permafrost Definitions: U.S. Natl. Research Council, Highway Research Board, Washington, D.C., HRB BullAdJoin ResearchGate to find the people and research you need to help your work.15+ million members118+ million publications700k+ research projectsJoin for freeRecommended publicationsDiscover more publications, questions and projects in PermafrostArticleFull-text availableLa terminologie de perg\u00e9lisol et notions connexesJanuary 1989J. A. Heginbottom H. M. FrenchR. O. Van Everdingen[...] Stuart Arthur HarrisRES View full-textArticleFull-text availableChanges in permafrost conditionsDecember 1995 \u00b7 Quaternary InternationalFred A. MichelBrian J. Moormann Margot B\u00f6se Rein VaikmaeView full-textArticleFull-text availableGlossary of Permafrost and Related Ground-Ice TermsJanuary 1988J. A. Heginbottom H. M. FrenchR. O. Van Everdingen[...] Stuart Arthur HarrisRES View full-textArticleFrost peat mounds on Hermansen\u00f8ya (Oscar II Land, NW Svalbard) \u2013 their genesis, age and terminologyOctober 2012 \u00b7 BoreasTomasz JaworskiW\u0142adys\u0142aw NiewiarowskiHere we present research on previously uninvestigated frost peat mounds occurring on a peat bog in the southern part of Hermansen\u00f8ya, NW Svalbard. Detailed characteristics are given of the environmental conditions of the peat bog and of the morphological features and surface structure of the frost peat mounds, as well as an analysis of the internal structure of one mound. Three types of frost ... [Show full abstract] peat mounds have been distinguished: disc\u2010shaped mounds (low), mid\u2010sized mounds with gentle sides, and high mounds with steep sides. Radiocarbon dating of the peat within the frost peat mound performed for the first time on Svalbard and a detailed analysis of the deposits demonstrated that in the high mound (1.3 m) there is an ice\u2010peat core and peat cover without ice. There are three layers of peat of different ages separated by at least two hiatuses. A generalized history of the development of the peat bog from about 8 ka BP is established. The studied mound displays two development cycles unknown elsewhere. The older relict part of the peat mound was formed during a climatic cooling about 3.0\u20132.5 ka BP, while the younger part originated during the Little Ice Age (c. AD 1550\u20131850). Despite certain similarities of these mounds to some palsas, this term should not be applied to the mounds because they are smaller and their cores consist mostly of layers of massive injection ice, the presence of which indicates a pressurized system in their genesis.Read moreDiscover moreDownload citationWhat type of file do you want? RIS BibTeX Plain TextWhat do you want to download? Citation only Citation and abstractDownloadLooking for the full-text?You can request the full-text of this article directly from the authors on ResearchGate.Request full-textAlready a member? Log inorDiscover by subject areaRecruit researchersJoin for freeLoginEmail Tip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inor log in withWelcome back! Please log in.Email \u00b7 HintTip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inor log in withNo account? Sign upAboutNewsCompanyCareersSupportHelp centerFAQBusiness solutionsRecruitingAdvertisingAd\u00a9 ResearchGate 2019. All rights reserved.ImprintTermsPrivacy", "Frost CIVIL ENGINEERING DATABASE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF CIVIL ENGINEERS ASCE LIBRARY Thermal Performance of Trench Backfills for Buried Water Mains A Frost Protection Design for Fruit Trees in Southwest Colorado The project explores the feasibility of producing commercial quantities of fruit in the high and arid environment of Southwestern Colorado by using low-volume water delivery systems for... Instrumentation for Vehicle Mobility Testing in the Frost Effects Research Facility Installation and Monitoring of Thermal Conductivity Suction Sensors in a Fine-Grained Subgrade Soil Subjected to Seasonal Frost Reliability-Based Design for Feeeze-Thaw Concrete Observation of pavements in Iowa shows results from the test for freezing and thawing of concrete, ASTM C-666, is not always consistent with field performance. Similar concrete made with... Coal Mine Waste Formation and Changes of Microstructure Under Artificial Salting Soil-Pipe Interaction During Frost Heaving Around a Buried Chilled Pipeline The freezing of soil water around a buried chilled pipeline leads to soil heaving, which is affected by the presence of the pipe. This process may eventually cause pipeline failure. The... Numerical Analysis of Frost Shields The term &apos;frost sheilding&apos; has been used to describe the practice of using flat stock rigid insulation materials burial above a water or sewer pipe to reduce... Sprinkler System Design for Frost Protection Both undertree and overtree systems for frost protection by sprinkling are currently being used. The criteria based on experimental results and theoretical modeling have been reviewed... Performance of Pavement at Central Wisconsin Airport Fire Hydrant Winter Maintenance Program for Anchorage Design and Installation of a Pile Foundation in a Remote Area of Alaska Deep Frost Effects on a Longitudinal Edge Drain Comparison of Insulated and Noninsulated Pavements Preliminary Results of Frost Heave Tests in a Large Cell Preliminary Results From Simulation of Retaining Wall Displacement by Frost Action Section One\u2014Embankment Design and Construction in Cold Regions: An Overview Section Two \u2014 Embankment Stabilization Techniques Section Seven\u2014Case Histories in Seasonal Frost Areas Pipeline Frost Heave Predictions Using a 2-D Thermal Model Chilled structures founded on initially unfrozen soils cause a zone or &apos;bulb&apos; of frost to develop with time. This time period may be of seasonal duration, as... \u25c4 Previous 1 2 [3] 4 5 ... Next \u25ba Return to search Copyright \u00a9 1996 - , American Society of Civil Engineers Contact Us | Terms | Help | Privacy", "Seasonal | Definition of Seasonal by Merriam-Webster SINCE 1828 Menu JOIN MWU Gain access to thousands of additional definitions and advanced search features\u2014ad free! JOIN NOW GAMES BROWSE THESAURUS WORD OF THE DAY VIDEO MORE WORD OF THE DAY VIDEO WORDS AT PLAY FAVORITES WORDS AT PLAY FAVORITES Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram dictionary thesaurus JOIN MWU GAMES THESAURUS WORD OF THE DAY VIDEO WORDS AT PLAY FAVORITES Follow: Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram seasonal adjective sea\u00b7\u200bson\u00b7\u200bal | \\ \u02c8s\u0113z-n\u0259l , \u02c8s\u0113-z\u1d4an-\u0259l\\ Definition of seasonal 1 : of, relating to, or varying in occurrence according to the season seasonal storms 2 : affected or caused by seasonal need or availability seasonal industries Other Words from seasonal More Example Sentences Learn More about seasonal Keep scrolling for more Other Words from seasonal seasonality \\ \u02ccs\u0113-\u200bz\u0259-\u200b\u02c8na-\u200bl\u0259-\u200bt\u0113 \\ noun seasonally \\ \u02c8s\u0113z-\u200bn\u0259-\u200bl\u0113 , \u02c8s\u0113-\u200bz\u1d4an-\u200b\u0259-\u200bl\u0113 \\ adverb Examples of seasonal in a Sentence The rise in gas prices is seasonal. The store hires seasonal workers during the holidays. Recent Examples on the Web Workers for small businesses and seasonal employees will see their minimum wage reach $15 an hour only in 2026. \u2014 Mike Catalini, The Seattle Times, \"New Jersey becomes 4th state to approve $15 hourly wage,\" 5 Feb. 2019 This long-term data is especially difficult to gather because forest firefighting is a seasonal job for many, Welle explains, and cross-sectional studies require studying the same population over a period of many years. \u2014 Carolyn L. Todd, SELF, \"The Dangerous Health Risks That Could Follow the California Wildfires,\" 16 Nov. 2018 The company is offering full-time, part-time and seasonal jobs in housekeeping, transportation, security, food and beverage, and lifeguarding. \u2014 Maria Clark, NOLA.com, \"Looking for a job? Disney World is hiring 3,500 people, offering hiring bonuses up to $3,000,\" 1 May 2018 His brief seasonal job at NATS Nursery amounted to packing up orders of potted plants, transporting them on a dune buggy and loading them onto an 18-wheeler, Shepherd said. \u2014 Tom Schad, USA TODAY, \"From factory job to Division II, Nathan Shepherd has taken winding path to NFL draft,\" 20 Apr. 2018 There were toasts by family members, and chef Eliza Glaister used ingredients that were all seasonal and sourced from within 50 miles of the venue. \u2014 Alexandra Macon, Vogue, \"This Wedding in the Berkshires Turned Into an Exuberant Lawn Party,\" 9 Jan. 2019 Asteatotic eczema, on the other hand, is more seasonal, and fall and winter are the most common times that people experience eczema flare-ups. \u2014 Talia Abbas, SELF, \"11 Tips for How to Treat Eczema During the Winter,\" 7 Jan. 2019 One of my personal favorite foods for seasonal eating is the humble sweet potato. \u2014 Joy Bauer, Ms, Woman's Day, \"Nutrition Expert Joy Bauer's Tips for Eating Healthy on a Budget,\" 23 Jan. 2019 This Fantastic Fest gem got a wide, seasonal release in the US this year, giving curious film fans everywhere the chance to see just how a zombie-Christmas high school musical works in practice. \u2014 Sam Machkovech And Nathan Mattise, Ars Technica, \"Films for the discerning nerd: Ars picks the best of 2018,\" 27 Dec. 2018 These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'seasonal.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback. See More First Known Use of seasonal 1838, in the meaning defined at sense 1 Keep scrolling for more Learn More about seasonal Share seasonal Resources for seasonal Time Traveler! Explore the year a word first appeared Dictionary Entries near seasonal season Season's Greetings seasonable seasonal seasonal affective disorder season check season crack Statistics for seasonal Last Updated 17 Mar 2019 Look-up Popularity Time Traveler for seasonal The first known use of seasonal was in 1838 See more words from the same year Keep scrolling for more More Definitions for seasonal seasonality noun Financial Definition of seasonality What It Is Seasonality is a fluctuation in sales or profits during the course of a fiscal year. How It Works For example, the restaurant industry is somewhat seasonal. Sales for many companies are stronger in summer and fall (the second and third quarter) and are lower in the winter and early spring (the fourth and first quarter). Much of this is attributable to New Year's resolutions to diet, spend less or cook more; the April 15 annual tax deadline also makes consumers more money-conscious. Accordingly, the sales of restaurant companies go up and down throughout the year but in a somewhat predictable pattern. Why It Matters Seasonality is a major reason that an investor or analyst can't just make an annual sales projection and then expect the company to meet 1/12 of that sales or profit projection every month. Some months will be higher, some months will be lower. Knowing how much higher or lower those sales should be month to month will make for more accurate seasonal projections. Source: Investing Answers seasonal adjective English Language Learners Definition of seasonal : happening or needed during a particular time of the year : normal for a certain time of year See the full definition for seasonal in the English Language Learners Dictionary seasonal adjective sea\u00b7\u200bson\u00b7\u200bal | \\ \u02c8s\u0113-z\u1d4an-\u0259l \\ Kids Definition of seasonal : happening, available, or used at a certain season seasonal foods a seasonal residence Keep scrolling for more More from Merriam-Webster on seasonal Spanish Central: Translation of seasonal Nglish: Translation of seasonal for Spanish Speakers Britannica English: Translation of seasonal for Arabic Speakers Comments on seasonal What made you want to look up seasonal? Please tell us where you read or heard it (including the quote, if possible). Show Comments Hide Comments WORD OF THE DAY parabolic of or relating to a parable or parabola Get Word of the Day daily email! Test Your Vocabulary A Green Quiz What is the best definition of green-eyed monster? a voracious appetite nauseated jealousy corruption Test your vocabulary with our 10-question quiz! TAKE THE QUIZ Test Your Knowledge - and learn some interesting things along the way. TAKE THE QUIZ TRENDING NOW crawdad New novel makes waves non sequitur, sequitur Manafort judge addresses defense trope AOC tweets against border wall SEE ALL Love words? Need even more definitions? Subscribe to America's largest dictionary and get thousands more definitions and advanced search\u2014ad free! Merriam-Webster unabridged Words at Play Can 'Exponential' Mean 'Lots'? (Or, 'How to Disappoint Your Math Teacher') Playing the 'Wild Card' It can be anything. Why Is 'Celtic' Pronounced Two Ways? \\SELT\\ is the older one 6 Words That Come from Names of Places When the name on the map gets its own meaning Ask the Editors A Look at Uncommon Onomatopoeia Some imitative words are more surprising than others When Body Parts Are Also Verbs Head, shoulders, metaphors, and toes Literally How to use a word that (literally) drives some people nuts. Is Singular 'They' a Better Choice? The awkward case of 'his or her' Word Games A Green Quiz How many questions can you answer about the word \"green\"? Take the quiz Return of Name that Color! Additional colors! More obscure than before! Take the quiz How Strong Is Your Vocabulary? Test your vocabulary with our 10-question quiz! Take the quiz Syn City Build a city of skyscrapers\u2014one synonym at a time. Play the game Merriam Webster Learn a new word every day. Delivered to your inbox! OTHER MERRIAM-WEBSTER DICTIONARIES SPANISH CENTRAL LEARNER'S ESL DICTIONARY WORDCENTRAL FOR KIDS VISUAL DICTIONARY SCRABBLE\u00ae WORD FINDER MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S UNABRIDGED DICTIONARY BRITANNICA ENGLISH - ARABIC TRANSLATION NGLISH - SPANISH-ENGLISH TRANSLATION FOLLOW US Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Browse the Dictionary: a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z 0-9 Home Help Apps About Us Shop Advertising Info Dictionary API Contact Us Word of the Year Law Dictionary Medical Dictionary Privacy Policy Terms of Use Browse the Thesaurus Browse the Medical Dictionary Browse the Legal Dictionary Browse the Spanish-English Dictionary \u00a9 2019 Merriam-Webster, Incorporated Learn More from M-W Trending: 'Crawdad': A Novel's Title Sings Learn More from M-W Can 'Exponential' Mean 'Lots'? Learn More from M-W A Green Quiz Learn More from M-W 6 Words Derived from Place Names Learn More from M-W A Look at Uncommon Onomatopoeia", "geocryology - Wiktionary geocryology Definition from Wiktionary, the free dictionary Jump to navigation Jump to search English[edit] Etymology[edit] geo- +\u200e cryology Noun[edit] geocryology (uncountable) The study of the frozen portions of the Earth. Retrieved from \"https://en.wiktionary.org/w/index.php?title=geocryology&oldid=43891985\" Categories: English words prefixed with geo-English lemmasEnglish nounsEnglish uncountable nouns Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces EntryDiscussion Variants Views ReadEditHistory More Search Navigation Main PageCommunity portalPreferencesRequested entriesRecent changesRandom entryHelpGlossaryDonationsContact us Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this page In other languages \u4e2d\u6587 Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version This page was last edited on 24 May 2017, at 18:22. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Privacy policy About\u00a0Wiktionary Disclaimers Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "Palsa - Wikipedia Palsa From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia \u00a0\u00a0(Redirected from Palsas) Jump to navigation Jump to search A low, often oval, frost heave occurring in polar and subpolar climates This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources:\u00a0\"Palsa\"\u00a0\u2013\u00a0news\u00a0\u00b7 newspapers\u00a0\u00b7 books\u00a0\u00b7 scholar\u00a0\u00b7 JSTOR (May 2015) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) A group of well developed palsas as seen from above A palsa is a low, often oval, frost heave occurring in polar and subpolar climates, which contain permanently frozen ice lenses. Like pingos, palsas consist of an ice core with overlying soil, but they are generally smaller than pingos, often occur in groups and may develop from ground water without additional hydrostatic pressure. Palsas are characteristically found in areas with discontinuous permafrost, and in such areas they may be the only reliable surface evidence of permafrost. Surface water, found in bogs, enhances palsa formation in areas called palsa bogs. Contents 1 Genesis 2 Morphology 2.1 Permafrost plateau 3 Geographic distribution 4 Differences and commonalities between pingos and palsas 5 Terminology and synonyms 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Genesis[edit] Palsas may be initiated in areas of a moor or bog where the winter freezing front penetrates relatively faster than surrounding areas, perhaps due to an unusually thin cover of snow. The lack of thermal insulation provided by thick snow permits much deeper freezing in winter. This ice may then last through the summer with a persistent 'bump' of up to several cm due to frost heave. The elevated surface of a palsa will tend also to have thinner snow cover, allowing greater winter cooling, while in summer the surface material (especially if organic) will dry out and provide thermal insulation. Thus the interior temperature is consistently lower than that of adjacent ground. This contributes to the formation of an ice lens which grows by drawing up surrounding water. The expansion of the ice upon freezing exerts pressure on the surrounding soil, further forcing water out of its pore spaces which then accumulates on and increases the volume of the growing ice lens. A positive feedback loop develops. Changes in surface moisture and vegetation will then be such as to preserve the newly formed permafrost. The overlying soil layer is gradually lifted up by frost heaving.[1] In cross-section, the ice cores of a palsa show layering, which is caused by the successive winter freezing intervals. The pressing out of water from the pores is not crucial, however, since the boggy soil is water-saturated and thus always provides enough water for ice core growth. Palsas appear to go through a developmental cycle that eventually leads to thawing and collapse. Open cracks that commonly accompany palsa growth and the water that tends to accumulate around palsas, probably as a result of their weight depressing the adjacent bog surface, are important factors in this process. The fact that palsas in various stages of growth and decay occur together shows that their collapse is not necessarily indicative of climatic change. All that is usually left after a palsa collapses is a depression surrounded by a rim. Morphology[edit] The Storflaket peat bog near Abisko in northern Sweden is a permafrost plateau. It shows some signs of collapse such as cracks at its borders Palsa forms include mounds, moderately straight ridges, and winding ridges. Palsas in Iceland have been described as hump shaped, dike shaped, plateau shaped, ring shaped, and shield shaped, those in Norway as palsa plateaus, esker palsas, string palsas, conical or dome-shaped palsas, and palsa complexes. Widths are commonly 10\u201330 m, and lengths 15\u2013150 m. However, lengths of up to 500 m have been reported for esker-like palsa ridges running parallel to the gradient of a bog. Heights range from less than 1 m to about 10 m at a maximum above the surrounding area. Large forms tend to be considerably less conical than small ones. In places, palsas combine to form complexes several hundred meters in extent. The permafrost core contains ice lenses no thicker than 2\u20133\u00a0cm, though locally lenses up to almost 40\u00a0cm thick have been described. Palsas form in groups or \"fields\" and the individual palsa can show its age difference from the others. Palsa surfaces are frequently traversed by open cracks, caused by doming (dilation cracking), frost cracking, or desiccation. The vegetation of a palsa may comprise low shrubs and lichen in addition to the sedges characterizing the peat. Also, the higher a palsa grows the dryer the peat covering the palsa becomes leading to more insulation which protects the inner core from melting. There are two types of palsas, those with a peat core and those with a core of mineral soil, usually silt. The peat-core type is the most common, the other being regarded as exceptional by some, but more common than formerly thought. Permafrost plateau[edit] Permafrost plateaus are structures of coalesced palsas that form a continuous elevated flatland area usually in a peat bog. Permafrost plateaus may have parts suffering decay while others are growing at the same time. Permafrost plateaus are usually surrounded by wetlands but have often internal water pools during summer due to uneven relief, partial decay and thaw. Geographic distribution[edit] Anders Rapp's map of the limit of palsas and discontinuous permafrost in Fennoscandia. Palsas are typical forms of the discontinuous permafrost zone regions and are therefore found in Subarctic regions of northern Canada and Alaska, Siberia, northern Fennoscandia and Iceland.[2] They are almost exclusively associated with bogs and commonly occur in areas where the winters are long and the snow cover tends to be thin. In some places palsas extend into underlying permafrost; in others they rest on an unfrozen substratum. In the southern hemisphere palsa remains from the last glacial maximum have been identified on the Argentine side of Isla Grande de Tierra del Fuego just north of Cami Lake.[3] Remainders of Ice-Age palsas are to be found also in Hochmooren of Central Europe, such as Hohen Venn in the German-Belgian border area. Differences and commonalities between pingos and palsas[edit] Palsas are structurally similar to pingos, however with heights between approx. 0.5 and 2\u00a0m and lengths between approx. 5 and 25\u00a0m, palsas are significantly smaller than pingos. Both however are considered to be true perennial permafrost mounds since both occur in areas of continuous permafrost. Moreover, contrary to pingos which are usually isolated, palsas usually arise in groups with other palsas, such as in a so-called palsa bog. Unlike pingos, palsas do not require surrounding permafrost to grow, seeing as palsa are permafrost. Pingos also grow below the active layer, which is the depth that the annual freeze-thaw cycle occurs, and palsa grow in the active layer.[citation needed] Both palsas and pingos result from freezing of water to an ice core. Palsas, however, do not necessarily require positive hydrostatic pressure (to inject water), since the boggy soil is water-saturated and therefore has sufficient supply for the growing ice core.[citation needed] Terminology and synonyms[edit] Palsa (plural: palsas) is a term from the Finnish language meaning \"a hummock rising out of a bog with a core of ice,\" which in turn is a borrowing from Northern Sami, balsa.[4] As palsas particularly develop in moorlands they are therefore also named palsamoors. Bugor and bulginniakhs are general terms in the Russian language (the latter of Yakutian origin) for both palsas and pingos. References[edit] ^ De Schutter, Paul (2005-12-03), Palsas & Lithalsas, retrieved 2013-06-10 ^ Sepp\u00e4l\u00e4, Matti (1986). \"The origin of palsas\". Geografiska Annaler: Series A, Physical Geography. 68 (3): 141\u2013147. doi:10.1080/04353676.1986.11880167. ^ The Late Cenozoic of Patagonia and Tierra del Fuego, retrieved 17 June 2009 ^ dictionary.com definition of palsa Further reading[edit] Brown, R.J.W.; Kupsch W.O. (1974). Permafrost terminology. Altona, Manitoba: National Research Council Canada. Washburn, A.L. (1980). Geocryology. New York: John Wiley & Sons. ISBN\u00a00-470-26582-5. Williams, Peter J.; Michael W. Smith (1989). The frozen Earth. New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN\u00a00-521-36534-1. External links[edit] Pictures of palsas and further information: Palsa, a Fennoscandian term for a round or elongated hillock or mound, maximum height of about 10\u00a0m, composed of a peat layer overlying mineral soil. William W. Shilts Geologic Image Gallery (Illinois State Geological Survey) Field trip guide on periglacial (cryogenic) geomorphology (html) Field trip guide on periglacial (cryogenic) geomorphology (pdf) Interpretation guide of natural geographic features: Palsa bog (index) Interpretation guide of natural geographic features: Palsa bog (aerial photographs) \u20acU(RO)CK article from a 2005 issue vtePeriglacial environmentLandforms Blockfield Bratschen Cryoplanation terrace Glacial erratic Paha Palsa Periglacial lake Pingo Protalus rampart Rock glacier Strandflat Glaciokarst Thermokarst Patterned ground Frost boil Polygons Solifluction lobes and sheets Sorted stripe Stone ring Processes Cryoplanation Cryosuction Cryoturbation Fluvio-thermal erosion Frost heave Frost weathering Gelifluction Ice segregation Methane release Nivation Solifluction Syngenetic permafrost growth Zero-curtain effect Soils and deposits Active layer Gelisols Ice wedge Loess Peat Permafrost Stratified slope deposit Talik Yedoma Biomes and ecotones Arctic tundra Arctic tree line Antarctic oasis Antarctic tundra Montane grasslands and shrublands Alpine tundra Alpine tree line (Massenerhebung effect) Taiga (Drunken trees) Climate Alpine Polar Subpolar Category:Periglacial landforms Template:Glaciers Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Palsa&oldid=874506340\" Categories: PalsasGeomorphologyGeologic domesGlaciologyPatterned groundsPeriglacial landformsHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionArticles needing additional references from May 2015All articles needing additional referencesAll articles with unsourced statementsArticles with unsourced statements from October 2010Use dmy dates from October 2010 Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces ArticleTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version Languages DeutschEspa\u00f1olEsperantoFran\u00e7aisFrysk\u00cdslenskaItalianoLimburgsNederlandsNorskNorsk nynorskPolskiSuomiSvenskaT\u00fcrk\u00e7e\u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0441\u044c\u043a\u0430 Edit links This page was last edited on 19 December 2018, at 18:07\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "Geocryologist dictionary definition | geocryologist defined Definitions geocryologistNoun (plural geocryologists)One who studies geocryology. English Wiktionary. Available under\u00a0CC-BY-SA\u00a0license. Link/Cite Link to this page Cite this page MLA Style \"geocryologist.\" YourDictionary, n.d. Web. 27 February 2019. <https://www.yourdictionary.com/geocryologist>. APA Style geocryologist. (n.d.). Retrieved February 27th, 2019, from https://www.yourdictionary.com/geocryologist Dictionary Thesaurus Examples See in a sentence Example articles Quotes Famous Quotes Quote Articles Spanish Spanish-English Translation Reference Reference Education ESL Grammar Abbreviations Biography Books & Literature Examples Foreign Languages Resources Slideshows Word\u00a0Finder Word\u00a0Finder 4 Pics 1 Word Answers Anagram Solver Unscramble Word Cookies Cheat Word Game Dictionary Word Unscrambler Words With Friends Cheat Share DEFINITIONS Dictionary Thesaurus Examples See in a sentence Example articles Quotes Famous Quotes Quote Articles Spanish Spanish-English Translation Reference Reference Education ESL Grammar Abbreviations Biography Books & Literature Examples Foreign Languages Resources Slideshows Word\u00a0Finder Word\u00a0Finder 4 Pics 1 Word Answers Anagram Solver Unscramble Word Cookies Cheat Word Game Dictionary Word Unscrambler Words With Friends Cheat Share Home Dictionary Definitionsgeocryologist Also Mentioned In geocryologists WORDS NEAR geocryologist IN THE DICTIONARY geocoronalgeocoronasgeocronitegeocryologicalgeocryologistgeocryologistsgeocryologygeocyclicgeodatageodatabase Scrabble\u00ae points: 20 More on Word Finder \u2192 Follow YourDictionary Get our free Amazon Alexa Skills! Join YourDictionary today Yes, I'd like to receive Word of the Day emails from YourDictionary.com By continuing, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Please set a username for yourself. People will see it as Author Name with your public flash cards. Username:", "Cryosuction - Wikipedia Cryosuction From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Cryosuction is concept of negative pressure in freezing soil resulting from transformation of liquid water to ice in the soil pores whereby water migrates through soil pores to the freezing zone (through capillary action).[1] [2] Fine-grained soils such as clays and silts enables greater negative pressures than more coarse-grained soils due to the smaller pore size. In periglacial environments, this mechanism is highly significant and it is the predominant process in ice lens formation in permafrost areas.[3] Several models for ice-lens formation by cryosuction exist, among others the Hydrodynamic model and the Pre-melting model, many of them based on the Clausius\u2013Clapeyron relation with various assumptions, yielding cryosuction potentials of 11 to 12 atm per degree Celsius below zero depending on pore size.[4] See also[edit] Pore water pressure Suction Permafrost References[edit] ^ Williams, P.J.; M.W. Smith (1991). \"The Frozen Earth: Fundamentals of Geocryology\". Polar Record. 27 (163): 370. doi:10.1017/S0032247400013231. Retrieved 2010-05-31. ^ Hohmann, Maria (March 1997). \"Soil freezing -- the concept of soil water potential. State of the art\". Cold Regions Science and Technology. 25 (2): 101\u2013110. doi:10.1016/S0165-232X(96)00019-5. ISSN\u00a00165-232X. Retrieved 2010-05-31. ^ Dor\u00e9, Guy (2004). \"Development and Validation of the Thaw-weakening Index\". International Journal of Pavement Engineering. 5 (4): 185\u2013192. doi:10.1080/10298430412331317464. ISSN\u00a01029-8436. ^ Davis, Neil (2001). Permafrost: A Guide to Frozen Ground in Transition. University of Alaska Press. p.\u00a0351. ISBN\u00a0978-1-889963-19-8. vtePeriglacial environmentLandforms Blockfield Bratschen Cryoplanation terrace Glacial erratic Paha Palsa Periglacial lake Pingo Protalus rampart Rock glacier Strandflat Glaciokarst Thermokarst Patterned ground Frost boil Polygons Solifluction lobes and sheets Sorted stripe Stone ring Processes Cryoplanation Cryosuction Cryoturbation Fluvio-thermal erosion Frost heave Frost weathering Gelifluction Ice segregation Methane release Nivation Solifluction Syngenetic permafrost growth Zero-curtain effect Soils and deposits Active layer Gelisols Ice wedge Loess Peat Permafrost Stratified slope deposit Talik Yedoma Biomes and ecotones Arctic tundra Arctic tree line Antarctic oasis Antarctic tundra Montane grasslands and shrublands Alpine tundra Alpine tree line (Massenerhebung effect) Taiga (Drunken trees) Climate Alpine Polar Subpolar Category:Periglacial landforms Template:Glaciers This geology article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.vte This hydrology article is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.vte Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cryosuction&oldid=873106301\" Categories: Arctic geography terminologyGeomorphologyHydrologyGeology stubsHydrology stubsHidden categories: All stub articles Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces ArticleTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version Languages ItalianoPortugu\u00eas Edit links This page was last edited on 11 December 2018, at 04:33\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "Geocryology and Geocryological Zonation of Mongolia | National Snow and Ice Data Center Skip to main content National Snow and Ice Data Center Home Data Data Sets for Research Brightness Temperature Glaciers Ice Sheets Permafrost Sea Ice Soil Moisture Snow ...search for more Scientific Data Search Support for Researchers Analysis & Imaging Tools Data Announcements Submit Your Data Data Policies User Support Data for Everyone Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Glacier Photograph Collection Greenland Ice Sheet Today MASIE (Daily sea ice extent) Satellite Observations of Arctic Change Sea Ice Index Virtual Globes: Google Earth Sponsored Programs Antarctic Glaciological Data Center Exchange for Local Observations and Knowledge of the Arctic (ELOKA) NOAA at NSIDC NASA Distributed Active Archive Center at NSIDC (NSIDC DAAC) Looking for facts and information? See About the Cryosphere. Research Scientists Research Grants Scientific Publications Informatics Research NSIDC Scientific Expeditions On Thin Ice: Expedition to a Crumbling Ice Shelf Scientists blog from Antarctica and provide a glimpse of what it's like to do research in the field. Read their blog ... News For the Media Newsroom: For the Media For Data Users Data Announcements The Drift Current Conditions Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Greenland Today Satellite Observations of Arctic Change NSIDC In the News Events NSIDC Monthly Highlights Icelights: Answers to your burning questions about ice and climate What's hot in the news around climate and sea ice and what are scientists talking about now? Read more... About About NSIDC NSIDC People Our Sponsors Jobs NSIDC Monthly Highlights Use & Copyright Contact Us Support NSIDC NSIDC's Green Data Center About the Cryosphere Quick Facts All About The Cryosphere All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Frozen Ground All About Sea Ice All About Arctic Climatology & Meteorology Snow, Ice and Climate Change Studying the Cryosphere Photo Gallery Educational Resources Cryosphere Glossary What is the Cryosphere? When scientists talk about the cryosphere, they mean the places on Earth where water is in its solid form, frozen into ice or snow. Read more ... Web pagesData Sets Frozen Ground Data Center Overview Frozen Ground Data Maps Glossary Geocryology and Geocryological Zonation of MongoliaAccess Data Find Data Search NSIDC Data NASA Earthdata Search IceBridge Portal Data Collections List Stay Current Arctic Sea Ice News and Analysis Sea Ice Index (Passive microwave satellite data) MASIE (Daily sea ice extent, multi-source) Greenland Today Newsroom Learn About Snow and Ice Icelights: Answers to Your Questions Cryosphere Quick Facts All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Sea Ice Arctic Climatology - A Primer Get Help Knowledge Base Etc. Use & Copyright Web Policy Jobs Home | Contact Us\u00a9 2019, National Snow and Ice Data Center :: Advancing knowledge of Earth's frozen regions", "Geocryology | SpringerLink Skip to main content Skip to table of contents This service is more advanced with JavaScript available, learn more at http://activatejavascript.org SpringerLink Search SpringerLink Search Home Log in Encyclopedia of Snow, Ice and Glaciers 2011 Edition | Editors: Vijay\u00a0P.\u00a0Singh, Pratap\u00a0Singh, Umesh\u00a0K.\u00a0Haritashya Contents Search GeocryologyAuthorsAuthors and affiliationsAmit\u00a0KumarReference work entryFirst Online: 26 August 2014DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-90-481-2642-2_177 11 Readers 80 Downloads How to citeGeocrology is a branch of a more general science which has come into common usage to describe processes and properties of resources having temperatures <0\u00b0C, and the term frozen is suggested to illustrate the solid phase of water. Geocryology was developed as an integrative discipline with links to geography, geology, engineering, hydrology, and ecology. The Polish geologist Walery Lozinski used the term \u201cperiglacial\u201d to describe the deposits and landforms believed to be the result of frost weathering.BibliographyYershov, E. D., 1998. General Geocryology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.Google ScholarCopyright information\u00a9\u00a0Springer Science+Business Media B.V.\u00a02011Authors and AffiliationsAmit\u00a0Kumar1Email author1.Department of GeologyCentre of Advanced Study in Geology, Panjab UniversityChandigarhIndia How to cite Cite this entry as: Kumar A. (2011) Geocryology. In: Singh V.P., Singh P., Haritashya U.K. (eds) Encyclopedia of Snow, Ice and Glaciers. Encyclopedia of Earth Sciences Series. Springer, Dordrecht .RIS Papers Reference Manager RefWorks Zotero .ENW EndNote .BIB BibTeX JabRef Mendeley About this entry First Online 26 August 2014 DOI https://doi.org/10.1007/978-90-481-2642-2 Publisher Name Springer, Dordrecht Print ISBN 978-90-481-2641-5 Online ISBN 978-90-481-2642-2 eBook Packages Earth and Environmental Science Buy this book on publisher's site Reprints and Permissions Search book Search within book Type for suggestions Table of contents Previous Page 7 Navigate to page number of 24 Next About this reference work Introduction Editors and affiliations Bibliographic information F Fresh Water Storage Frictional Melting Frost Frozen Soil Hydrology Frozen Toe (Outer Zone of Glacier Snout) G Gelisols Geochemistry of Snow and Ice Geocryology GIS in Glaciology Glacial Drainage Characteristics Glacial Ecosystems Glacial Erosion Glacial Erratic Glacial Geomorphology and Landforms Evolution Glacial Grooves Glacial Overdeepening Glacial Striations Glacial Trough Glacial/Interglacial Cycles Glaciation During Times of Enhanced/Reduced Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide Over 10 million scientific documents at your fingertips Switch Edition Academic Edition Corporate Edition Home Impressum Legal information Privacy statement How we use cookies Accessibility Contact us Springer Nature \u00a9 2018 Springer Nature Switzerland AG. Part of Springer Nature. Not logged in Not affiliated 70.59.11.147", "Geocryology dictionary definition | geocryology defined Definitions geocryologyNoun (uncountable)The study of the frozen portions of the Earth. English Wiktionary. Available under\u00a0CC-BY-SA\u00a0license. Link/Cite Link to this page Cite this page MLA Style \"geocryology.\" YourDictionary, n.d. Web. 27 February 2019. <https://www.yourdictionary.com/geocryology>. APA Style geocryology. (n.d.). Retrieved February 27th, 2019, from https://www.yourdictionary.com/geocryology Dictionary Thesaurus Examples See in a sentence Example articles Quotes Famous Quotes Quote Articles Spanish Spanish-English Translation Reference Reference Education ESL Grammar Abbreviations Biography Books & Literature Examples Foreign Languages Resources Slideshows Word\u00a0Finder Word\u00a0Finder 4 Pics 1 Word Answers Anagram Solver Unscramble Word Cookies Cheat Word Game Dictionary Word Unscrambler Words With Friends Cheat Share DEFINITIONS Dictionary Thesaurus Examples See in a sentence Example articles Quotes Famous Quotes Quote Articles Spanish Spanish-English Translation Reference Reference Education ESL Grammar Abbreviations Biography Books & Literature Examples Foreign Languages Resources Slideshows Word\u00a0Finder Word\u00a0Finder 4 Pics 1 Word Answers Anagram Solver Unscramble Word Cookies Cheat Word Game Dictionary Word Unscrambler Words With Friends Cheat Share Home Dictionary Definitionsgeocryology Also Mentioned In geocryologist geocryological WORDS NEAR geocryology IN THE DICTIONARY geocronitegeocryologicalgeocryologistgeocryologistsgeocryologygeocyclicgeodatageodatabasegeodatabasesGeode Scrabble\u00ae points: 21 More on Word Finder \u2192 Follow YourDictionary Get our free Amazon Alexa Skills! Join YourDictionary today Yes, I'd like to receive Word of the Day emails from YourDictionary.com By continuing, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Please set a username for yourself. People will see it as Author Name with your public flash cards. Username:", "Geocryology | SpringerLink Skip to main content Skip to table of contents This service is more advanced with JavaScript available, learn more at http://activatejavascript.org SpringerLink Search SpringerLink Search Home Log in Applied Geology 1984 Edition | Editors: Charles W.\u00a0Finkl Contents Search GeocryologyAuthorsAuthors and affiliationsRobert\u00a0F.\u00a0BlackReference work entryDOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/0-387-30842-3_27 584 Downloads How to citeGeocryology (from the Greek geos, earth; kryos, cold; and logos, discourse) literally means a discourse on the cold portion of the earth. It is the study of ice and snow on the earth, especially the study of Permafrost . By convention, the term has not generally included the study of ice in the atmosphere, yet snow and ice cover a major part of the earth. Terminology is complicated (see e.g., Everdingen, 1976). For emphasis and ease of handling, various subdivisions of geocryology are discussed elsewhere in this volume (q.v. Permafrost, Engineering Geology). Overlap also will be found with other topics (Washburn, 1980). The \u201cworld of ice\u201d is a fascinating place for skiers and others, but a scourge to many. Avalanches from a local overabundance of snow are to be avoided or reduced in their destructiveness by periodic artificial triggering, yet elsewhere techniques are sought to augment snow accumulation for an ultimate increase in water supply. Perennial and seasonal snow and ice modify...This is a preview of subscription content, log in to check access.ReferencesArmy Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory, 1969, Cold Regions Science and Engineering Monograph 1-A.Google ScholarEverdingen, R. O. van, 1976. Geocryological terminology, Canadian Jour. Earth Sci. 3, 862\u2013867.Google ScholarHobbs, P. V., 1974. Ice Physics. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press, 837p.Google ScholarJohn, B. S. (ed.), 1979. The Winters of the World \u2014 Earth under the Icebergs. New York: Wiley, 256p.Google ScholarKingery, W. D. (ed.), 1963. Ice and Snow \u2014 Properties, Processes, and Applications. Cambridge, Mass.: M.I.T. Press, 684p.Google ScholarNational Research Council of Canada, 1978. Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Permafrost, Vols. I and II. Ottawa, 1202p.Google ScholarWashburn, A. L., 1980. Geocryology. New York: Wiley, 406p.Google ScholarCross-references\u00a0Geotechnical Engineering: Remote Sensing, Engineering Geology; Rheology, Soil and Rock.Copyright information\u00a9\u00a0Van Nostrand Reinhold Company Inc.\u00a01984Authors and AffiliationsRobert\u00a0F.\u00a0BlackThere are no affiliations available How to cite Cite this entry as: Black R.F. (1984) Geocryology. In: Finkl C. (eds) Applied Geology. Encyclopedia of Earth Sciences Series, vol 3. Springer, Boston, MA .RIS Papers Reference Manager RefWorks Zotero .ENW EndNote .BIB BibTeX JabRef Mendeley About this entry DOI https://doi.org/10.1007/0-387-30842-3 Publisher Name Springer, Boston, MA Print ISBN 978-0-442-22537-7 Online ISBN 978-0-387-30842-5 eBook Packages Springer Book Archive Buy this book on publisher's site Reprints and Permissions Search book Search within book Type for suggestions Table of contents Previous Page 2 Navigate to page number of 4 Next About this reference work Introduction Editors and affiliations Bibliographic information E Electrokinetics F Field Geology Forensic geology Formation pressures, abnormal Foundation engineering G Geochemistry, applied Geochronology Geocryology Geology, applied Geomorphology, applied Geotechnical engineering Glacial landscapes, engineering geology Grout, grouting H Hydrodynamics, porous media Hydrogeology and geohydrology Hydrology Hydromechanics L Laterite, engineering geology Lime stabilization M Magnetic susceptibility, earth materials Over 10 million scientific documents at your fingertips Switch Edition Academic Edition Corporate Edition Home Impressum Legal information Privacy statement How we use cookies Accessibility Contact us Springer Nature \u00a9 2018 Springer Nature Switzerland AG. Part of Springer Nature. Not logged in Not affiliated 70.59.11.147", "Geocryology Sign in \u2630 About RHO Collections Free trial How to buy Promotions Close Recommend to a\u00a0friend Recommend to librarian First name * Last name * Email * Subject Friend's email * Message I thought you might be interested in the following publication(s). Position: Institution: Department: Librarian email address: * I recommend the publication for Personal or student reference I refer students to this publication for new research articles or for my work Benefit library's collection Acquisition of this publication will benefit department, faculty and student needs Affiliation I am a member of the publication's editorial board and strongly support the publication * Mandatory field Copy me to this email Close Recommend to a\u00a0friend Thank you Your recommendation has been sent to Close Redeem a voucher Free trial voucher code Invalid Search Enter keywords, authors, DOI etc Search History Search history from this session (0) Metrics Views 130 Altmetric for Books Information In This Chapter Definition and description Introduction Additional Term Originating in Russia History of Permafrost Research Measurement of Ground Temperature Conduction, Convection and Advection Thermal Regimes in Regions Based on Heat Conduction Continentality Index Moisture Movement in the Active Layer During Freezing and Thawing Moisture Conditions in Permafrost Grond Results of Freezing Moisture Strength of Ice Cryosols, Gelisols, and Leptosols Fragipans Salinity in Permafrost Regions Organic Matter Micro-Organisms in Permafrost Antarctic permafrost High-latitude permafrost Hight altitude permafrost in China Phenotypic traits Relation to climate change on the Tibetan Plateau Gas and Gas Hydrates Thermokarst Areas Offshore Permafrost Definition and description Authored by: Stuart A. Harris , Anatoli Brouchkov , Cheng Guodong Geocryology Print publication date:\u00a0 September \u00a02017 Online publication date:\u00a0 September \u00a02017 Print ISBN: 9781138054165 eBook ISBN: 9781315166988 Adobe ISBN: 10.4324/9781315166988-2 Download\u00a0Chapter Abstract Permafrost is defined as ground that remains below 0\u00b0C for more than two years (ACGR, 1988). It includes dry rock and soil, as well as all icy substrates including rock glaciers, but excluding true, icy glaciers. Icy glaciers are dealt with in science as a separate subject, although there are intergrades (Dobi\u0144ski, 2012). Saline water bodies may remain unfrozen as part of permafrost. Ground that is colder than 0\u00b0C is said to be cryotic . The study of permafrost is called geocryology and is part of cryology which is the study of all frozen matter. Cite Sorry, you do not have access to this eBook A subscription is required to access the full text content of this book. Username: Password: Sign In Other ways to access this content: Email to request access Recommend to my librarian Purchase this book Buy via www.routledge.com Shibboleth Related chapters Cryogenic patterned ground Thermokarst and thermal ero... The mechanics of frozen soi... Foundations in permafrost r... Search for more... \u00a9 Informa UK Limited, an Informa Group Company Home | About RHO | Collections | Free trial | How to buy | Promotions | Contact us | Help & FAQs Librarian resources | Privacy policy | Cookies | Terms & conditions Back to top Use of cookies on this website We are using cookies to provide statistics that help us give you the best experience of our site. You can find out more in our Privacy Policy. By continuing to use the site you are agreeing to our use of cookies. Accept", "SAGE Reference - GEOCRYOLOGY Skip to main content Products Browse Subjects Browse Content Types LOGIN: Profile Institution Back SAGE Video Bringing teaching, learning and research to life. SAGE Books The ultimate social sciences digital library. SAGE Reference The complete guide for your research journey. SAGE Navigator The essential social sciences literature review tool. SAGE Business Cases Real world cases at your fingertips. CQ Press Your definitive resource for politics, policy and people. Back Business & Management Counseling & Psychotherapy Criminology & Criminal Justice Education Geography, Earth & Environmental Science Health & Social Care Media, Communication & Cultural Studies Politics & International Relations Psychology Sociology Back Books Encyclopedias Handbooks Dictionaries Videos Cases Debates Major Works Back Profile Login Sign into your Profile to save and share content across SAGE Knowledge Email address Password Remember me? Forgot your login information? Back Institutional Login Please choose from an option shown below. Need help logging in? Click here Administrators and Non-Institutional Users: Username Password Remember me? Forgot your login information? Don't have access? View purchasing options Products Browse Subjects Browse Content Types LOGIN: Profile Institution Back SAGE Video Bringing teaching, learning and research to life. SAGE Books The ultimate social sciences digital library. SAGE Reference The complete guide for your research journey. SAGE Navigator The essential social sciences literature review tool. SAGE Business Cases Real world cases at your fingertips. CQ Press Your definitive resource for politics, policy and people. Back Business & Management Counseling & Psychotherapy Criminology & Criminal Justice Education Geography, Earth & Environmental Science Health & Social Care Media, Communication & Cultural Studies Politics & International Relations Psychology Sociology Back Books Encyclopedias Handbooks Dictionaries Videos Cases Debates Major Works Back Profile Login Sign into your Profile to save and share content across SAGE Knowledge Email address Password Remember me? Forgot your login information? Back Institutional Login Please choose from an option shown below. Need help logging in? Click here Administrators and Non-Institutional Users: Username Password Remember me? Forgot your login information? Don't have access? View purchasing options Profile Login Sign into your Profile to save and share content across SAGE Knowledge Email address Password Remember me? Forgot your login information? Institutional Login Please choose from an option shown below. Need help logging in? Click here Administrators and Non-Institutional Users: Username Password Remember me? Forgot your login information? Don't have access? View purchasing options Browse Browse by Subject Business & Management Counseling & Psychotherapy Criminology & Criminal Justice Education Geography, Earth & Environmental Science Health & Social Care Media, Communication & Cultural Studies Politics & International Relations Psychology Sociology Browse by Content Type Books Encyclopedias Handbooks Dictionaries Videos Cases Debates Major Works Products SAGE Video Bringing teaching, learning and research to life. SAGE Books The ultimate social sciences digital library. SAGE Reference The complete guide for your research journey. SAGE Navigator The essential social sciences literature review tool. SAGE Business Cases Real world cases at your fingertips. CQ Press Your definitive resource for politics, policy and people. Search: Advanced LOGIN: Profile Institution Reference GEOCRYOLOGY John A. Matthews & Hugh M. French In: Encyclopedia of Environmental Change GEOCRYOLOGY Edited by: John A. Matthews DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.4135/9781446247501.n1626 Subject: Environmental Sciences (general), Environmental Technology, Policy & Management Show Hide Page Numbers Citations Add to My List Share Text Size Citations Format: APA Chicago Harvard MLA Matthews, J. & French, H. (2014). Geocryology. In J. Matthews (Ed.), Encyclopedia of environmental change (pp. 447-447). Thousand Oaks,, CA: SAGE Publications, Ltd. doi: 10.4135/9781446247501.n1626 Matthews, John A. and Hugh M. French. \"GEOCRYOLOGY.\" In Encyclopedia of Environmental Change, edited by John A. Matthews, 447. Thousand Oaks,, CA: SAGE Publications, Ltd., 2014. doi: 10.4135/9781446247501.n1626. Matthews, J & French, H 2014, 'Geocryology', in Matthews, J (ed.), Encyclopedia of environmental change, SAGE Publications, Ltd., Thousand Oaks,, CA, pp. 447, viewed 17 March 2019, doi: 10.4135/9781446247501.n1626. Matthews, John A. and Hugh M. French. \"GEOCRYOLOGY.\" Encyclopedia of Environmental Change. Ed. John A. Matthews. Thousand Oaks,: SAGE Publications, Ltd., 2014. 447. SAGE Knowledge. Web. 17 Mar. 2019, doi: 10.4135/9781446247501.n1626. Copy to Clipboard Export: Endnote Reference Manager ProCite RefWorks BibTeX Zotero Medlars Mendeley Word Export Cancel Have you created a personal profile? Login or create a profile so that you can create alerts and save clips, playlists, and searches. Login/Register Email Please log in from an authenticated institution or log into your member profile to access the email feature. Login/Register Share Cancel Font Size A Small A Normal A Large Entry Entries A-Z Subject Index This field is now regarded as the study of perennially frozen ground, or permafrost science. However, the term has been used more broadly in the past, ranging from the study of the whole ... Looks like you do not have access to this content. Login Don\u2019t know how to login? Click here for free trial login. [0-9] AB C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Entries by Letter: A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Entries Per Page: 20 40 60 Entries by Letter: 173998 Loading... Citations Add to My List Share Text Size Citations Format: APA Chicago Harvard MLA Matthews, J. & French, H. (2014). Geocryology. In J. Matthews (Ed.), Encyclopedia of environmental change (pp. 447-447). Thousand Oaks,, CA: SAGE Publications, Ltd. doi: 10.4135/9781446247501.n1626 Matthews, John A. and Hugh M. French. \"GEOCRYOLOGY.\" In Encyclopedia of Environmental Change, edited by John A. Matthews, 447. Thousand Oaks,, CA: SAGE Publications, Ltd., 2014. doi: 10.4135/9781446247501.n1626. Matthews, J & French, H 2014, 'Geocryology', in Matthews, J (ed.), Encyclopedia of environmental change, SAGE Publications, Ltd., Thousand Oaks,, CA, pp. 447, viewed 17 March 2019, doi: 10.4135/9781446247501.n1626. Matthews, John A. and Hugh M. French. \"GEOCRYOLOGY.\" Encyclopedia of Environmental Change. Ed. John A. Matthews. Thousand Oaks,: SAGE Publications, Ltd., 2014. 447. SAGE Knowledge. Web. 17 Mar. 2019, doi: 10.4135/9781446247501.n1626. Copy to Clipboard Export: Endnote Reference Manager ProCite RefWorks BibTeX Zotero Medlars Mendeley Word Export Cancel Have you created a personal profile? Login or create a profile so that you can create alerts and save clips, playlists, and searches. Login/Register Email Please log in from an authenticated institution or log into your member profile to access the email feature. Login/Register Share Cancel Font Size A Small A Normal A Large Similar content on SAGE Knowledge Loading content... SAGE Journals SAGE Research Methods SAGE Stats CQ Press Library About SAGE Knowledge About SAGE Video About SAGE Business Cases What's New Privacy Policy Terms of Use Help Resources: Librarian Resources Accessibility SAGE Knowledge Feedback SAGE Video Feedback Create a SAGE Knowledge Profile Connect with SAGE Contact Us Trial Login Copyright \u00a9 2019 by SAGE Publications Back to Top", "Igarka Geocryology Laboratory - INTERACT Services Menu About Project Consortium People Pool of expertise Bulletin Board Field Sites Collaborations News Outreach Gallery Publications Glossary MEDIA INTERACT in Media GDPR Resources INTERACT presentation material Presentations Deliverables Meeting Minutes INTERACT newsletters Contact us Accessing the Arctic Accessing the Arctic Infrastructures TA/RA call TA User Community TA Ambassadors Info to User Groups Project Descriptions Publications Virtual Access Complaints TA/RA Data Protection Policy TA Office Managing stations Managing stations Meetings Handling data Arctic Awareness Coping with Change Managing risks Using Drones Tracking Biodiversity Igarka Geocryology Laboratory Contact Details Bldg. 8-A, 1-st District, Igarka, Krasnoyarsk region, Russia, 663200 Station e-mail: igl(at)igarka.net Station Manager: Nikita Tananaev Phone: Tel.: +7 923 247 34 87 (cell), Tel./fax: +7 39172 2 14 26 Nikita Tananaev Email Shortlist from Station Catalogue over facilities and science disciplines. STATION NAME AND OWNER The Igarka Geocryology Laboratory is a scientific affiliation of the Melnikov PermafrostPermafrost is frozen ground that remains at or below zero degrees Celsius (32 degrees Fahrenheit) for two or more years. It forms in regions where the mean annual temperature is... More Institute in Yakutsk (Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences). LOCATION The Igarka Geocryology Laboratory is situated in Igarka (67\u00b027\u201911\u2019\u2019 N, 86\u00b032\u201907\u2019\u2019 E), on the right bank of the largest Russian river Yenisei, 120 km north of the Arctic CircleA line of latitude currently at 66\u00b0 33\u2032 44\u2033 (66.5622\u00b0) north of the Equator. It is the southern limit of the region of the Earth that experiences the 'midnight sun'.... More. Igarka belongs to the Turukhansk District (Krasnoyarsk Region), and it has 4892 inhabitants (2011). BIODIVERSITY AND NATURAL ENVIRONMENT Igarka is situated at the north-western part of the Siberian platform, on the western edge of the Tunguska syneclise, one of the largest sedimentary basins of the world. The terrain is ? glacio-lacustrine plain, about 70 m above the low level of Yenisei River. It is shaped by a variety of permafrost processes, with thermokarstA landform that results when ground ice (ice-rich\u00a0permafrost) melts. The melting leaves small, marshy hollows and hummocks in the land as the ground settles unevenly. See also\u00a0thermokarst lake.... More lakes, glacial processes, and pingos. The climateThe average weather we would expect over a long period of time (seasons, years, decades). Climate varies from place-to-place across the Earth. Climate is determined by long-term (over at least... More in Igarka is moderate continental, with low winter temperatures and relatively warm summers. The air temperatures are below zero for about 225 days per year, with an average of 70 rainy and 130 snowy days. The area is dominated by the Yenisei River with a mean annual discharge of about 18 000 m3/s and a peak flow of about 160 000 m3/s. The hydrological network is well developed with typical Western Siberian tundraA type of ecosystem in which tree growth is limited by low temperatures. The origin of the word is from\u00a0from the\u00a0Kildin Sami\u00a0word\u00a0t\u016bnd\u00e2r, meaning \"uplands\" or\u00a0\"treeless mountain tract\". In the northern... More rivers (Yenisei River left bank) and Eastern Siberian taigaBoreal\u00a0forest, a nearly continuous belt of\u00a0coniferous\u00a0trees across North America and Eurasia. Taiga is dense forest with many fallen trees and marshy soil. The term derives form the southern Siberian Turkic-Mongol... More rivers (Yenisei River right bank). Due to permafrost degradation, i.e. ground ice thawing, thermokarst lakes are widely distributed. The Northern taiga with relatively dense taiga forests (dominated by larch, fir, birch, and Siberian pine) is the common vegetation type. In the shrub layer, willow and alder are widespread, together with marsh tea and blueberries. Tundra communities dominate the watershed divides, widely represented by peatbogs covered with carex, cloudberries, cotton grass, and bog moss. The hydroclimatic conditions lead to the formation of different permafrost-affected clay soils. HISTORY AND FACILITIES Since the establishment in 1930, researchers of the Igarka Geocryology Laboratory have conducted construction-engineering tests and regional permafrost studies. The research resulted in the development of new construction techniques in permafrost. Intensive studies regarding the physical and mechanical properties of frozen soils, permafrost processes, soil moisture migration in freeze-thaw cycles, and frost heave have been carried out. The use of novel engineering techniques in permafrost in the Soviet-era was strongly linked to the Igarka Research Station. Regional features were also extensively studied: Igarka was used as a \u201cbase camp\u201d for field research in Western and Eastern Siberia, and northern and southern parts of the Krasnoyarsk Region. There is also the Museum of Permafrost (founded in 1965) with frozen tunnels more than 5 m below the surface. GENERAL RESEARCH AND DATABASES Nowadays the laboratory is continuing the research in regional and engineering geocryology. Current projects include long-term monitoring of ground ice from the ArcticDefinitions of the Arctic vary according to environmental, geographical, political, cultural and scientific perspectives. Some scientists define the Arctic as areas having a high latitude, long winters, short, cool summers,... More Circle to Norilsk, a 100.100 m grid of the CALM project (Circumpolar Active LayerThe layer of ground above\u00a0permafrost\u00a0that is subject to annual thawing and freezing.... More Monitoring), geothermal measurements in a network of boreholes, studies of permafrost processes, permafrost hydrologyThe study of water in the environment, particularly its amount, movement and quality. It encompasses water in rivers, lakes,\u00a0glaciers, soil and underground aquifers. The way in which water (liquid and... More, water turbidity, and sediment-fl ux. Methods of construction on high-temperature, ice-rich permafrost and the development of new foundation types are the main engineering research aspects. HUMAN DIMENSION The Igarka Geocyrology Labaratory is situated in the town of Igarka. Until the early 1990s the Igarka Timber Factory was the key economic activity in the area, but after the prohibition of lumber floating down the river, the factory was closed, thus undermining the city\u2019s economy. Current economy is mainly determined by the river and sea ports, the modern airport, and the service departments of \u201cVankoroil\u201d, the Vankor Oil Field operator (the oil field is located about 130 km west of Igarka). ACCESS Igarka can be reached by air and water transport. Igarka Airport has a modern infrastructure and accepts all major aircraft and helicopter types. Flights are performed to Krasnoyarsk three times a week. Water transport connects Igarka with Dudinka and Norilsk (including Alykel Airport) to the north, and Krasnoyarsk to the south, from early June to early October twice a week. Helicopter lease is available. Field Site information table pdf Download other stations Khanymey Research Station Russia > View Research Station Samoylov Island Russia > View Kluane Lake Research Station Canada > View EGRIP Field Station Greenland, Denmark > View Adygine Research Station Kyrgyz Republic > View Evenkian Field Station Russia > View Khibiny Educational and Scientific Station Russia > View Oulanka Research Station Finland > View Arctic Station Greenland, Denmark > View CEN Umiujaq Research Station Canada > View CEN Radisson Ecological Research Station Canada > View K\u00e1rh\u00f3ll Research Station Iceland > View CEN Clearwater Lake Research Station Canada > View Meinypil\u2019gyno Community Based Biological Station Russia > View Orotuk Field Station Russia > View Czech Arctic Station of Josef Svoboda Svalbard, Norway > View Beliy Island Research Station Russia > View Spasskaya Pad Scientific Forest Station Russia > View CEN Bylot Island Field Station Canada > View North-East Science Station Russia > View Copyright 2017 \u00a9 Interact International Network for Terrestrial Research and Monitoring in the Arctic This site uses functional cookies and external scripts to improve your experience. My settingsAcceptGoogle AnalitycsPrivacy SettingsThis site uses functional cookies and external scripts to improve your experience. Which cookies and scripts are used and how they impact your visit is specified on the left. You may change your settings at any time. Your choices will not impact your visit. NOTE: These settings will only apply to the browser and device you are currently using. Google AnalitycsWe are using anonymously data to monitor visits and efficiency of our communications and report it periodically the EU. EnableSave my settings\u2715", "Geocryology: Characteristics and Use of Frozen Ground and Permafrost Landforms, 1st Edition (Hardback) - Routledge US\u00a0Choose a Country...AfghanistanAlbaniaAlgeriaAmerican SamoaAndorraAngolaAnguillaAntarcticaAntigua And BarbudaArgentinaArmeniaArubaAustraliaAustriaAzerbaijanBahamasBahrainBangladeshBarbadosBelarusBelgiumBelizeBeninBermudaBhutanBoliviaBonaire, Sint Eustatius And SabaBosnia And HerzegovinaBotswanaBouvet IslandBrazilBritish Indian Ocean TerritoryBrunei DarussalamBulgariaBurkina FasoBurundiCambodiaCameroonCanadaCape VerdeCayman IslandsCentral African RepublicChadChileChinaChristmas IslandCocos (keeling) IslandsColombiaComorosCongoCongo, The Democratic Republic Of TheCook IslandsCosta RicaCroatiaCuracaoCyprusCzech RepublicC\u00efte D'ivoireDenmarkDjiboutiDominicaDominican RepublicEcuadorEgyptEl SalvadorEquatorial GuineaEritreaEstoniaEthiopiaFalkland Islands (malvinas)Faroe IslandsFijiFinlandFranceFrench GuianaFrench PolynesiaFrench Southern TerritoriesGabonGambiaGeorgiaGermanyGhanaGibraltarGreeceGreenlandGrenadaGuadeloupeGuamGuatemalaGuernseyGuineaGuinea-bissauGuyanaHaitiHeard Island And Mcdonald IslandsHoly See (vatican City State)HondurasHong KongHungaryIcelandIndiaIndonesiaIraqIrelandIsle Of ManIsraelItalyJamaicaJapanJerseyJordanKazakhstanKenyaKiribatiKorea, Republic OfKuwaitKyrgyzstanLao People's Democratic RepublicLatviaLebanonLesothoLiberiaLibyan Arab JamahiriyaLiechtensteinLithuaniaLuxembourgMacaoMacedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic OfMadagascarMalawiMalaysiaMaldivesMaliMaltaMarshall IslandsMartiniqueMauritaniaMauritiusMayotteMexicoMicronesia, Federated States OfMoldova, Republic OfMonacoMongoliaMontenegroMontserratMoroccoMozambiqueMyanmarNamibiaNauruNepalNetherlandsNetherlands AntillesNew CaledoniaNew ZealandNicaraguaNigerNigeriaNiueNorfolk IslandNorthern Mariana IslandsNorwayOmanPakistanPalauPalestinian Territory, OccupiedPanamaPapua New GuineaParaguayPeruPhilippinesPitcairnPolandPortugalQatarReunionRomaniaRussian FederationRwandaSaint Barth\u0192lemySaint HelenaSaint Kitts And NevisSaint LuciaSaint MartinSaint Pierre And MiquelonSaint Vincent And The GrenadinesSamoaSan MarinoSao Tome And PrincipeSaudi ArabiaSenegalSerbiaSeychellesSierra LeoneSingaporeSint Maarten (dutch Part)SlovakiaSloveniaSolomon IslandsSomaliaSouth AfricaSouth Georgia And The South Sandwich IslandsSpainSri LankaSurinameSvalbard And Jan MayenSwazilandSwedenSwitzerlandTaiwanTajikistanTanzania, United Republic OfThailandTimor-lesteTogoTokelauTongaTrinidad And TobagoTunisiaTurkeyTurkmenistanTurks And Caicos IslandsTuvaluUgandaUkraineUnited Arab EmiratesUnited KingdomUnited StatesUnited States Minor Outlying IslandsUruguayUzbekistanVanuatuVenezuelaViet NamVirgin Islands, BritishVirgin Islands, U.s.Wallis And FutunaWestern SaharaYemenZambiaZimbabwe\u00c5land Islands Region Change The country you have selected will result in the following: Product pricing will be adjusted to match the corresponding currency. The title will be removed from your cart because it is not available in this region Based on the shipping address you selected, the following changes will be made to your order before it is processed: Currency and shipping options will change to reflect those available in the selected region. Pricing and discounts will be adjusted according to the shipping destination based on regional availability. The title will be removed from your cart because it is not available in this region Continue Cancel Shopping Cart 0 Account Sign In Register Wish List 0Toggle navigationHomeSubjects Academic ResearchAnthropologyApplied MediaArchaeologyArchitectureArt & Visual CultureAsian StudiesAudioBuilding & ConstructionBuilt EnvironmentBusiness, Management & AccountingCentral Asian, Russian & East European StudiesClassical StudiesCommunicationCriminology & Criminal JusticeCultural StudiesDevelopment StudiesEconomicsEducationEnvironment & SustainabilityFilmmakingFinanceFurther EducationGeographyHealth and SafetyHistoryInforma LawK-12LandscapeLanguage LearningLawLinguisticsLiteratureMedia CommunicationMedia Studies & JournalismMental HealthMiddle East StudiesMilitary, Strategic & Security StudiesMuseum & Heritage StudiesMusicNursing & HealthPhilosophyPhotographyPlanning & Urban DesignPolitics & International RelationsProperty & Real EstatePsychologyReferenceReligionResearch MethodsRoutledge Classics and Routledge Great MindsSocial WorkSociologySports & Leisure StudiesTheatreTheatre & Performance StudiesTourism, Hospitality and EventsUrban StudiesWomen\u2019s and Gender StudiesProducts SearchBooksE-booksSeriesOnline ResourcesTextbooksLibrary ReferenceJournalsOpen AccessResources For AuthorsFor BooksellersFor InstructorsFor LibrariansFor ResearchersFor Societies/AssociationsFor Special SalesFor StudentsFor the PressFree ResourcesInfo / Help About UsContact UsOrdering and DeliveryCorporate InformationFeatured AuthorsGeocryologyCharacteristics and Use of Frozen Ground and Permafrost Landforms, 1st EditionBy Stuart A. Harris, Anatoli Brouchkov, Cheng GuodongCRC Press 766 pages For Instructors Request Inspection Copy For Librarians Available on Taylor & Francis eBooks >> Share Purchasing Options:$ = USD Hardback: 9781138054165pub: 2017-09-28$240.00x eBook (VitalSource) : 9781315166988pub: 2017-09-28 Purchase eBook $57.95$52.16 SAVE ~$5.80 12 Month Rental - $34.77 6 Month Rental - $28.98from $28.98 Add to Cart Add to Wish ListOther eBook Options Find on Amazon KindleFind on Apple iBook StoreLearn More FREE Standard Shipping!DescriptionReviewsContentsAuthorsSubjectsDescriptionThis book provides a general survey of Geocryology, which is the study of frozen ground called permafrost. Frozen ground is the product of cold climates as well as a variety of environmental factors. Its major characteristic is the accumulation of large quantities of ice which may exceed 90% by volume. Soil water changing to ice results in ground heaving, while thawing of this ice produces ground subsidence often accompanied by soil flowage. Permafrost is very susceptible to changes in weather and climate as well as to changes in the microenvironment. Cold weather produces contraction of the ground, resulting in cracking of the soil as well as breakup of concrete, rock, etc. Thus permafrost regions have unique landforms and processes not found in warmer lands. The book is divided into three parts. Part 1 provides an introduction to the characteristics of permafrost. Four chapters deal with its definition and characteristics, the unique processes operating there, the factors affecting it, and its general distribution. Part 2 consists of seven chapters describing the characteristic landforms unique to these areas and the processes involved in their formation. Part 3 discusses the special problems encountered by engineers in construction projects including settlements, roads and railways, the oil and gas industry, mining, and the agricultural and forest industries. The three authors represent three countries and three language groups, and together have over 120 years of experience of working in permafrost areas throughout the world. The book contains over 300 illustrations and photographs, and includes an extensive bibliography in order to introduce the interested reader to the large current literature. Finalist of the 2019 PROSE Awards.Reviews\"[This book] should be of interest to a wide range of scientists concerned with the Earth, environmental and ecological sciences, including those specialising in the Holocene. Stuart Harris and his co-authors provide a[\u2026] comprehensive survey of the closely related field of geocryology. This is defined as the study of frozen ground, especially permafrost. Their book also includes the characteristics, processes, landforms and environmental factors affecting frozen ground, to which they add a wide variety of practical problems encountered by engineers and others who attempt to occupy and use permafrost terrain. Part III of Geocryology is a superb demonstration, in the context of geocryology, of the intimate, reciprocal relationship that can exist between pure and applied science. Much of the detailed information and theoretical knowledge that underpins present understanding of frozen ground was developed hand in hand with relatively recent attempts to live in and exploit the resources available in permafrost areas.\" John A Matthews, Swansea University,UK. In: The Holocene Vol. 28(4) (2018). \"With three co-authors who come from different countries to share their research experience and expertise, this book makes available geocryological information not published originally in the English language. As expected, the book is well endowed with case studies and illustrative examples taken mostly from northern Canada, Alaska, Siberia, and Tibet in China. These are a major attraction of this publication. [\u2026] Overall, it is comprehensive and places geomorphology and geotechnical engineering under a single cover. As cold regions in general, and circumpolar areas in particular, are highly sensitive to changes due to natural and human-related causes, this book offers materials valuable to understanding and confronting present and future environmental changes. Without rendering quantitative treatment on many topics (except Chapter 12 on soil mechanics), the descriptive approach makes the book easily accessible to a general readership, and it will appeal to undergraduate students who are not mathematically inclined. Those who wish to pursue specific topics at greater depth can consult relevant articles listed in the very extensive bibliography, which covers 119 pages.\" Ming-ko Woo, Professor Emeritus at the School of Geography and Earth Sciences, McMaster University, Canada. Published in: Arctic, Vol. 71(2) (2018).Table of Contents Part I Introduction and characteristics of permafrost 1 Definition and description 1.1 Introduction 1.2 Additional terms originating in Russia 1.3 History of permafrost research 1.4 Measurement of ground temperature 1.5 Conduction, convection and advection 1.6 Thermal regimes in regions based on heat conduction 1.7 Continentality index 1.8 Moisture movement in the active layer during freezing and thawing 1.9 Moisture conditions in permafrost grond 1.10 Results of freezing moisture 1.11 Strength of ice 1.12 Cryosols, gelisols, and leptosols 1.13 Fragipans 1.14 Salinity in permafrost regions 1.15 Organic matter 1.16 Micro-organisms in permafrost 1.17 Gas and gas hydrates 1.18 Thermokarst areas 1.19 Offshore permafrost 2 Cryogenic processes where temperatures dip below 0\u25e6C 2.1 Introduction 2.2 The nature of ice and water 2.3 Effects of oil pollution on freezing 2.4 Freezing and thawing of the active layer in permafrost in equilibrium with a stable climate 2.5 Relation of clay mineralogy to the average position of the permafrost table 2.6 Ground temperature envelopes in profiles affected by changes in mean annual ground surface temperature (MASGT) 2.7 Needle ice 2.8 Frost heaving 2.9 Densification and thaw settlement 2.10 Cryostratigraphy, cryostructures, cryotextures and cryofacies 2.11 Ground cracking 2.12 Dilation cracking 2.13 Frost susceptibility 2.14 Cryoturbation, gravity processes and injection structures 2.15 Upheaving of objects 2.16 Upturning of objects 2.17 Sorting 2.18 Weathering and frost comminution 2.19 Karst in areas with permafrost 2.20 Seawater density and salinity 3 Factors affecting permafrost distribution 3.1 Introduction 3.2 Climatic factors 3.3 Terrain factors 4 Permafrost distribution 4.1 Introduction 4.2 Zonation of permafrost 4.3 Permafrost mapping 4.4 Examples of mapping units used 4.5 Modeling permafrost distribution 4.6 Advances in geophysical methods 4.7 Causes of variability reducing the reliability of small-scale maps 4.8 Maps of permafrost-related properties based on field observations 4.9 Use of remote sensing and aiborne platforms in monitoring environmental conditions and distubances 4.10 Sensitivity to climate change: Hazard zonation 4.11 Classification of permafrost stability based on mean annual ground temperature Part II Permafrost landforms II.1 Introduction 5 Frost cracking, ice-wedges, sand, loess and rock tessellons 5.1 Introduction 5.2 Primary and secondary wedges 6 Massive ground ice in lowlands 6.1 Introduction 6.2 Distribution of massive icy beds in surface sediments 6.3 Sources of the sediments 6.4 Deglaciation of the Laurentide ice sheet 6.5 Methods used to determine the origin of the massive icy beds 6.6 Massive icy beds interpreted as being formed by cryosuction 6.7 Massive icy beds that may represent stgnant glacial ice 6.8 Other origins of massive icy beds 6.9 Ice complexes including Yedoma deposits 6.10 Conditions for growth of thick ice-wedges 6.11 The mechanical condition of the growth of ice-wedges and its connection to the properties of the surrounding sediments 6.12 Buoyancy of ice-wedges 6.13 Summary of the ideas explaining yedoma evolution 6.14 Aufeis 6.15 Perennial ice caves 6.16 Types of ice found in perennial ice caves 6.17 Processes involved in the formation of perennial ice caves 6.18 Cycles of perennial cave evolution 6.19 Ice caves in subtropical climates 6.20 Massive blocks of ice in bedrock or soil 7 Permafrost mounds 7.1 Introduction 7.2 Mounds over 2.5m diameter 7.3 Cryogenic mounds less than 2.5m in diameter 8 Mass wasting of fine-grained materials in cold climates 8.1 Introduction 8.2 Classification of mass wasting 8.3 Slow flows 8.4 Cryogenic fast flows 8.5 Relative effect in moving debris downslope in the mountains 9 Landforms consisting of blocky materials in cold climates 9.1 Introduction 9.2 Source of the blocks 9.3 Influence of rock type 9.4 Weathering products 9.5 Biogenic weathering 9.6 Fate of the sloluble salts produced by chemical and biogenic weathering 9.7 Rate of cliff retreat 9.8 Landforms resulting from the accumulation of predominantly blocky materials in cryogenic climates 9.9 Talus containing significant amounts of finer material 9.10 Cryogenic block streams 9.11 Surface appearance of blocky landforms 10 Cryogenic patterned ground 10.1 Introduction 10.2 Forms of cryogenic patterned ground 10.3 Factors affecting the development of cryogenic patterned ground 10.4 Macroforms of cryogenic patterned ground 10.5 Cryogenic sorted patterned ground 10.6 Identification of active versus inactive forms of macro-sorted patterns 10.7 Microforms of cryogenic patterned ground 11 Thermokarst and thermal erosion 11.1 Introduction 11.2 Causes of thermokarst 11.3 Cavity development in permafrost 11.4 Effect of thermokarst on soil 11.5 Thermokarst landforms 11.6 Thermokarst and thermal erosion along river banks 11.7 Thermal erosion and thermokarst processes along sea coasts 11.8 Processes involved in the erosion of ice-rich arctic coastal sediments 11.9 Importance of coastal erosion of sediments containing permafrost Part III Use of permafrost areas III.1 Introduction 12 The mechanics of frozen soils 12.1 Introduction 12.2 Strains and stresses in the freezing and thawing of soils resulting in frost heaving 12.3 Rheological processes 12.4 Frost susceptibility 13 Foundations in permafrost regions: building stability 13.1 Introduction 13.2 The effect of construction on permafrost stability 13.3 Choice of method of construction 13.4 Building materials 13.5 Timing of construction 13.6 Types of foundations 14 Roads, railways and airfields 14.1 Introduction 14.2 The problems 14.3 Types of roads 14.4 Experimental embankments 14.5 Winter roads 14.6 Environmental effects of winter roads 14.7 Embankment heights 14.8 Unpaved embankments 14.9 Main problems with embankment stability 14.10 Concrete versus ballast railway tracks 14.11 Paving of road and airfield runways 14.12 Use of white paint 14.13 Bridges 14.14 Icings 14.15 Cut slopes 14.16 Airfield construction 15 Oil and gas industry 15.1 Introduction 15.2 Oil and gas exploration 15.3 Drilling rigs 15.4 Production and keeper wells 15.5 Sump problems 15.6 Pipelines 15.7 Monitoring 15.8 Compressor stations 15.9 Pipeline crossings 15.10 Effects of heat advection from producing wells 15.11 Gas hydrates in permafrost ice 16 Mining in permafrost areas 16.1 Introduction 16.2 Placer mining 16.3 Open cast/pit mining 16.4 Underground mining 16.5 Waste materials and tailings ponds 16.5.1 Toxic wastes 17 Provision of utilities 17.1 Introduction 17.2 Water supply 17.3 Waste disposal 17.4 Electric transmission lines 18 Agriculture and forestry 18.1 Introduction18.2 Zonation of natural vegetation across Siberia18.3 Zonation of natural vegetation in North America 18.4 Southern and Eastern Kazakhstan, Mongolia and the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau 18.5 The Eichfeld zones 18.6 Asian steppe grasslands and deserts 18.7 The development of modern agriculture in permafrost areas 18.8 Forestry 18.9 Potential effects of climate changesAbout the AuthorsStuart Arthur Harris was born in 1931, in Cheltenham, England. He earned the degrees of B. Sc. (Honours), M.Sc. and Ph.D. in Geology and D.Sc. in Geography from Queen Mary University, University of London. During his National Service, he advised the Chief Engineers Branch, British Troops Egypt and the Arab Legion Engineers in Jordan, solving problems in geology, water supply and engineering. Subsequently, he was a soil surveyor for the consulting firm, Hunting Technical Services, before becoming Government Soil Surveyor in Guyana. He taught in the geography Departments of the University of Chicago, Wilfred Laurier University, and the University of Kansas before joining the University of Calgary in 1969. The National Research Council of Canada asked him to study the relationship of climate to permafrost in 1973, and he mapped the permafrost distribution from Northern New Mexico to Inuvik, Northwest Territories. Subsequently, he carried out detailed studies of the permafrost landforms and processes in northwest Canada, as well as on the Tibetan Plateau, China. He has carried out field work in Iceland, the Alps, Poland, Russia, China, Mongolia, New Zealand and Kazakhstan, publishing over 200 papers, books and reports. The Russian Geographical Society awarded him the Nikolai Mihailovich Prjevalsky Medal for his research on Alpine permafrost in 1996. He has also organised three International Field Trips in the Rocky Mountains for overseas scientists in connection with International meetings in Canada. Professor Anatoli Brouchkov was born April 18, 1957 and raised in Khatanga of Arctic Siberia. He obtained his Ph.D and D.Sc degrees from the Geocryology Department of Geology Faculty of Lomonosov Moscow State University, studying under the tutelage of some of the recent famous Russian permafrost scientists such as V.A. Kudryavtsev, S.S. Vyalov, E. D. Yershov and N. N. Romanovski. Over the years, he has run a geocryological laboratory for the Russian Academy of Sciences as well as an underground permafrost laboratory in Amderma, involving research all over the Russian Arctic. He has specialized in the study of the effects of salinity on the properties of frozen ground and the effects of climate change on permafrost. He has also carried out a research on the survival of microorganisms in permafrost. In addition, he has acted as a geocryological consultant to Gazprom and other Russian and international companies, and a permafrost expert for World Meteorological Organization. He was a professor at Hokkaido University (Japan, 2001\u20132004) and Tyumen State University (since 2005), publishing over 150 papers and books. In 2010, he succeeded the late Edward Yershov as Professor and Head of the Geocryology Department of Moscow State University. Academician Cheng Guodong was born in 1943 in Shanghai, China. He earned his B.Sc. at Beijing Geology College (China University of Geosciences), and carried out fundamental research in the CREEL laboratories at Hanover, New Hampshire, before returning to China. Guodong became an Academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 1993. He was responsible for reorganizing the Institute of Glaciology and Geocryology of the Chinese Academy of Sciences to form the Cold and Arid Regions Environmental and Engineering Research Institute. He has led the research very successfully, thus enabling the modernization of the construction techniques in the permafrost areas of China during the last 15 years. One of his most important achievements was the development of the most effective methods of cooling the beds of linear transportation routes using blocks of rock. He has written eight books, and his name appears below the title of numerous papers dealing with the use of permafrost lands. He has received many awards in China, as well as being the recipient of one of the first three IPA Lifetime Achievement awards by the International Permafrost Association.Subject CategoriesEarth SciencesEarth SciencesGeochemistryEnvironmental GeologyGeology - Earth SciencesGeomorphologyBISAC Subject Codes/Headings: SCI019000 SCIENCE / Earth Sciences / GeneralSCI031000 SCIENCE / Earth Sciences / Geology \u00d7Close What is VitalSource ? Routledge eBooks are available through VitalSource. The free VitalSource Bookshelf\u00ae application allows you to access to your eBooks whenever and wherever you choose. Mobile/eReaders \u2013 Download the Bookshelf mobile app at VitalSource.com or from the iTunes or Android store to access your eBooks from your mobile device or eReader. Offline Computer \u2013 Download Bookshelf software to your desktop so you can view your eBooks with or without Internet access. Learn More about VitalSource Bookshelf \u00bb Bookshelf Online Browser version support \u00bb System requirements for Bookshelf for PC, Mac, IOS and Android etc. \u00bb Close \u00d7Close Multiple eBook Formats An eBook version of this title already exists in your shopping cart. If you would like to replace it with a different purchasing option please remove the current eBook option from your cart. View Cart Close \u00d7Close CHOICE \u2013 Outstanding Academic Title \u2013 Award Winner Close \u00d7Close CHOICE \u2013 2018 Outstanding Academic Title \u2013 Award Winner Close \u00d7Close Shingo Research and Professional Publication Award Winner Close SubjectsBuilt EnvironmentEducationNursing & Allied HealthPsychologyReferenceProductsBooksCustom PublishingE-booksHandbooksJournalsOnline ResourcesSeriesTextbooksResourcesFor AuthorsFor BooksellersFor InstructorsFor LibrariansFor ResearchersFor Societies/Assoc.For Special SaleFor StudentsFor the PressInfo & HelpAbout UsCareersContact UsOrdering & DeliveryRights & PermissionsSales Reps/AgentsStay Connected\u2026 Sign Up for Email AlertsBy using this website, you agree to the use of cookies. Learn more about how we use cookies.Privacy PolicyShipping PolicyContact Us\u00a9 2019 Taylor & Francis Group, a business owned by Informa PLC, registered office is 5 Howick Place, London SW1P 1WG. Registered in England and Wales. Number 3099067.", "| National Snow and Ice Data Center Skip to main content National Snow and Ice Data Center Home Data Data Sets for Research Brightness Temperature Glaciers Ice Sheets Permafrost Sea Ice Soil Moisture Snow ...search for more Scientific Data Search Support for Researchers Analysis & Imaging Tools Data Announcements Submit Your Data Data Policies User Support Data for Everyone Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Glacier Photograph Collection Greenland Ice Sheet Today MASIE (Daily sea ice extent) Satellite Observations of Arctic Change Sea Ice Index Virtual Globes: Google Earth Sponsored Programs Antarctic Glaciological Data Center Exchange for Local Observations and Knowledge of the Arctic (ELOKA) NOAA at NSIDC NASA Distributed Active Archive Center at NSIDC (NSIDC DAAC) Looking for facts and information? See About the Cryosphere. Research Scientists Research Grants Scientific Publications Informatics Research NSIDC Scientific Expeditions On Thin Ice: Expedition to a Crumbling Ice Shelf Scientists blog from Antarctica and provide a glimpse of what it's like to do research in the field. Read their blog ... News For the Media Newsroom: For the Media For Data Users Data Announcements The Drift Current Conditions Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Greenland Today Satellite Observations of Arctic Change NSIDC In the News Events NSIDC Monthly Highlights Icelights: Answers to your burning questions about ice and climate What's hot in the news around climate and sea ice and what are scientists talking about now? Read more... About About NSIDC NSIDC People Our Sponsors Jobs NSIDC Monthly Highlights Use & Copyright Contact Us Support NSIDC NSIDC's Green Data Center About the Cryosphere Quick Facts All About The Cryosphere All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Frozen Ground All About Sea Ice All About Arctic Climatology & Meteorology Snow, Ice and Climate Change Studying the Cryosphere Photo Gallery Educational Resources Cryosphere Glossary What is the Cryosphere? When scientists talk about the cryosphere, they mean the places on Earth where water is in its solid form, frozen into ice or snow. Read more ... Web pagesData Sets Cryosphere Glossary - Choose a Topic - climatology and meteorology freshwater ice frozen ground or permafrost glaciers icebergs and ice shelves ice sheets sea ice snow Search the Glossary: A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P | Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z | all ablation(1) combined processes (such as sublimation, fusion or melting, evaporation) which remove snow or ice from the surface of a glacier or from a snow-field; also used to express the quantity lost by these processes (2) reduction of the water equivalent of a snow cover by melting, evaporation, wind and avalanches. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorologyglacierssnow ablation areathe area of a glacier where more glacier mass is lost than gained.Topic:\u00a0glaciers ablation hollowsdepressions in the snow surface caused by the sun or warm, gusty wind.Topic:\u00a0glaciers ablation morainemound or layer of moraine in the ablation zone of a glacier; the rock has been plucked from the mountainside by the moving glacier and is melting out on the ice surface.Topic:\u00a0glaciers ablation seasonperiod during which glaciers lose more mass than they gain; usually coincides with summer.Topic:\u00a0glaciers ablation zonearea or zone of a glacier where snow and ice ablation exceed accumulation. Topic:\u00a0glaciers absolute differencethe difference, taken without regard to sign, between the values of two variables absolute errorthe difference between the measured or inferred value of a quantity and its actual value. absolute humidity(1) the ratio of the mass of water vapor to the volume occupied by a mixture of water vapor and dry air (2) mass of water contained in a unit volume of moist air. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology accretiongrowth of a cloud or precipitation particle by the collision and union of a frozen particle (ice crystal or snowflake) with a super-cooled liquid droplet which freezes on impact. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology accumulationall processes by which snow or ice are added to a glacier, this is typically the accumulation of snow, which is slowly transformed into ice; other accumulation processes can include avalanches, wind-deposited snow, and the freezing of rain within the snow pack.Topic:\u00a0glaciersclimatology and meteorologysnow accumulation areaarea of a glacier where more mass is gained than lost.Topic:\u00a0glaciers accumulation seasonperiod during which a glacier gains more mass than it loses; usually coincides with winter.Topic:\u00a0glaciers accumulation zonearea of a glacier where more mass is gained than lost.Topic:\u00a0glaciers accuracythe extent to which the readings of an instrument approach the true value of the calculated or measured quantities, supposing that all possible corrections are applied. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology acid precipitationrain or snow containing acidic substances, resulting from the atmospheric pollution mainly with sulfur and nitrogen; acid precipitation has a lower pH than unpolluted rain. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology active air-cooled thermal pilea foundation pile on which a cold air refrigeration system has been installed to remove heat from the ground. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active construction methods in permafrostspecial design and construction methods used for engineering works in permafrost areas where permafrost degradation cannot be prevented.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active ice wedgean ice wedge that is growing as a result of repeated (but not necessarily annual) winter cracking.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active layerthe layer of ground that is subject to annual thawing and freezing in areas underlain by permafrost; also known as seasonal frost. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active liquid refrigerant pilea foundation pile on which a liquid coolant refrigeration system has been installed to remove heat from the ground.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active rock glaciera mass of rock fragments and finer material, on a slope, that contains either an ice core or interstitial ice, and shows evidence of present movement.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrostglaciers active thermokarstthe process by which characteristic landforms are currently developing as a result of thawing of ice-rich permafrost or melting of massive ice. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active-layer failurea general term referring to several forms of slope failures or failure mechanisms commonly occurring in the active layer overlying permafrost. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active-layer thicknessthe thickness of the layer of the ground that is subject to annual thawing and freeing in areas underlain by permafrost.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost adfreeze strengththe tensile or shear strength which has to be overcome to separate two objects that are bonded together by ice.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost adfreeze/adfreezingthe process by which two objects are bonded together by ice formed between them.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost advancewhen a mountain glacier's terminus extends farther downvalley than before; glacial advance occurs when a glacier flows downvalley faster than the rate of ablation at its terminus. Topic:\u00a0glaciers advectionthe horizontal transfer of air mass properties by the velocity field of the atmosphere. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology advection fogfog which forms in the lower part of a warm moist air mass moving over a colder surface (land or water). Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology aerosolnon-gaseous substances, divided into solid particles or liquid droplets, held in suspension in the atmosphere. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology aggradational icethe additional ground ice formed as a direct result of permafrost aggradation. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost air freezing indexthe cumulative number of degree-days below 0\u00b0 C for the air temperature during a given time period.Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorologyfrozen ground or permafrost air massan extensive body of the atmosphere in which physical properties, particularly temperature and humidity, exhibit only small and continuous differences in the horizontal plane; it may extend over an area of several million square kilometers and over a height of several kilometers. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology air temperaturethe ambient temperature indicated by a thermometer exposed to the air but sheltered from direct solar radiation, or placed in an instrument shelter 1.5 to two meters above ground; also called surface temperature. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology air thawing indexthe cumulative number of degree-days above 0\u00b0C for the air temperature during a given period.Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorologyfrozen ground or permafrost Pages1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 \u2026 next \u203a last \u00bb Find Data Search NSIDC Data NASA Earthdata Search IceBridge Portal Data Collections List Stay Current Arctic Sea Ice News and Analysis Sea Ice Index (Passive microwave satellite data) MASIE (Daily sea ice extent, multi-source) Greenland Today Newsroom Learn About Snow and Ice Icelights: Answers to Your Questions Cryosphere Quick Facts All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Sea Ice Arctic Climatology - A Primer Get Help Knowledge Base Etc. Use & Copyright Web Policy Jobs Home | Contact Us\u00a9 2019, National Snow and Ice Data Center :: Advancing knowledge of Earth's frozen regions", "Permafrost | Define Permafrost at Dictionary.com Dictionary.comThesaurus.comEverything After ZWord of the DayVideoWord FactsGrammarCrossword SolverDaily CrosswordAll The WordsSlangEmojiGender & SexualityAcronymsDictionary.comThesaurus.comTry Our AppsdefinitionsSearchsynonymspermafrost[pur-muh-frawst, -frost]EXAMPLES|WORD ORIGINSEE MORE SYNONYMS FOR permafrost ON THESAURUS.COMnoun(in arctic or subarctic regions) perennially frozen subsoil.Explore Dictionary.comWhy Do Some People Gesticulate So Much?Emoji Challenge: Can You Translate More Emoji Into English?These Are the Longest Words in EnglishWhy Do We Use Onomatopoeia?Origin of permafrostFirst recorded in 1943; perma(nent) + frostAlso called pergelisol.Dictionary.com Unabridged Based on the Random House Unabridged Dictionary, \u00a9 Random House, Inc. 2019Related Words for permafrostchunk, glaze, hail, crystal, iceberg, icicle, glacier, sleet, diamonds, hailstone, floeExamples from the Web for permafrostContemporary Examples of permafrostI wondered what would happen to the trees if some of the permafrost melted, allowing roots to expand in longer growing seasons.Visiting the Arctic Circle\u2026Before It\u2019s Irreversibly ChangedTerry Greene SterlingApril 1, 2014British Dictionary definitions for permafrostpermafrostnounground that is permanently frozen, often to great depths, the surface sometimes thawing in the summerShow MoreWord Origin for permafrostC20: from perma (nent) + frostCollins English Dictionary - Complete & Unabridged 2012 Digital Edition \u00a9 William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd. 1979, 1986 \u00a9 HarperCollins Publishers 1998, 2000, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2012Word Origin and History for permafrostn.1943, coined in English by Russian-born U.S. geologist Siemon W. Muller (1900-1970) from perm(anent) frost.Show MoreOnline Etymology Dictionary, \u00a9 2010 Douglas Harperpermafrost in Sciencepermafrost[p\u00fbr\u2032m\u0259-fr\u00f4st\u2032]A layer of soil or bedrock that has been continuously frozen for at least two years and as long as tens of thousands of years. Permafrost can reach depths of up to 1,524 m (4,999 ft). It is found throughout most of the polar regions and underlies about one fifth of the Earth's land surface.Show MoreThe American Heritage\u00ae Science Dictionary Copyright \u00a9 2011. Published by Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company. All rights reserved.Others Are ReadingThese Words Were Inspired By AnimalsThe Year's Top Word TrendsWord of the Daygreen-eyedUsing These Words Will Make You Sound Like You're From New YorkDictionary.com's Top 10 Grammar TipsNearby words for permafrostperma-perma-pressperma-tanpermaculturepermadeathpermafrostpermafrost tablepermalinkpermalloypermanencepermanencyBrowse the Dictionary:#ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZBrowse by Category:SlangEmojiAcronymsPop CultureMoreAboutCareersContact UsCookies, Terms, & Privacy\u00a9 2019 Dictionary.com, LLC", "Drift mining | Revolvy Trending | Quizzes | Lists Sign up / Login Back | | | | Trending Quizzes Lists Contact Us Terms Privacy Policy Sign up or Login Create Folder My Feed My Topics My Folders Followers Following Quiz Scores Like Revolvy >> Drift mining Back to Top Paste Image Information Here: \u00d7 Image: Source: Save changes \u00d7 Cancel ... \u00d7 OK Cancel OK Cancel \u00d7 OK Cancel \u00d7 OK Cancel \u00d7 OK Cancel \u00d7 Save Cancel \u00d7 OK Clear Cancel \u00d7 OK Clear Cancel are you a bot?", "Drift mining - Wikipedia Drift mining From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search The mining of a mineral deposit by underground methods Drift mining is either the mining of an ore deposit by underground methods, or the working of coal seams accessed by adits driven into the surface outcrop of the coal bed.[1] A drift mine is an underground mine in which the entry or access is above water level and generally on the slope of a hill, driven horizontally into the ore seam.[2] Random House dictionary says the origin of the term \"drift mine\" is an Americanism, circa 1885\u20131890.[3] Drift is a more general mining term, meaning a near-horizontal passageway in a mine, following the bed (of coal, for instance) or vein of ore.[dubious \u2013 discuss] A drift may or may not intersect the ground surface.[4] A drift follows the vein, as distinguished from a crosscut that intersects it, or a level or gallery, which may do either.[5] All horizontal or subhorizontal development openings made in a mine have the generic name of drift. These are simply tunnels made in the rock, with a size and shape depending on their use\u2014for example, haulage, ventilation, or exploration.[6] Contents 1 Historical US drift mining (coal) 1.1 Illinois 1.2 Indiana 1.3 Kentucky 1.4 Maryland 1.5 Ohio 1.6 Pennsylvania 1.7 Tennessee 1.8 West Virginia 2 Historical US drift mining (gold) 2.1 Alaska 2.2 California 3 Historical drift mines in other countries 4 Drift mines in current production 5 Safety and environmental issues 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Historical US drift mining (coal)[edit] Coal miner standing in a drift portal at Fork Mountain, Tennessee, 1920. This section provides a very abbreviated snapshot of the drift mining information generally available. Illinois[edit] Argyle Lake State Park's website says the Argyle Hollow (occupied by a lake since 1948) has been rich in coal, clay and limestone resources. Historically, individuals commonly opened and dug their own \"drift mines\" to supplement their income.[7] In Appalachia, small coal mining operations such as these were known as \"country bank\" or \"farmer\" coal mines, and usually produced only small quantities for local use.[8] Indiana[edit] The Lusk Mine, now in Turkey Run State Park, was in operation from the late 1800s through the late 1920s. Too small for commercial operation, the mine probably provided coal for the Lusk family and later for the park.[9] Kentucky[edit] In 1820 the first commercial mine in Kentucky, known as the \"McLean drift bank\" opened near the Green River and Paradise in Muhlenberg County.[10] In Drift, Kentucky, Beaver Coal & Mining Company was the most well known operator of mines, but there were other smaller mines (Floyd-Elkhorn Consolidated Collieries, Turner-Elkhorn Coal Company, etc.) as well.[11] Maryland[edit] Dorsey Coal Company's Ashby coal mine, a small drift mine probably in the Upper Freeport coal; and the mine of the Taylor-Offutt Coal Company near Oakland, MD.[12] Ohio[edit] In the 1880s, State Inspector of Mines, Andrew Roy, issued a report on the Mines and Mining Resources of Ohio,[13] which includes the following paragraphs: The capacity or output of the mines of the State varies greatly. Thick coals are capable of a greater daily output than thin seams, and as a general rule drift mines possess greater advantages for loading coal rapidly than shaft mining openings. In many of the mines of the great vein region of the Hocking valley the capacity is equal to 1,200 to 1,500 tons per day. In shaft mines 600 to 700 tons daily is regarded as a good output. The first ton of coal in a shaft mine 100 feet in depth and having a daily capacity of 600 tons frequently costs the mining adventurer upwards of $20,000 (1888), and cases are on record where owing to the extraordinary amount of water in sinking, $100,000 (1888) have been expended before coal was reached. Drift mines, as they require no machinery for pumping water and raising coal, cost less than half the amount required in shaft mining. Water is, however, an expensive item in drift mines opened on the dip slope of the coal, and underground hauling under such conditions is unusually costly. Drift mine entry in West Virginia, 1908. Photo by Lewis Hine. Pennsylvania[edit] Indiana County: Graff Drift Mines, near Blairsville. Commodore Mines, Nos. 1 & 3 (drift mines), No. 2 (slope mine), Green Twp. Empire \"F\" Mine (1910-?), Shanktown; a drift mine, mining the \"B\" coal seam, mining done by machine, owner Pioneer Coal Company, Clearfield. Empire \"M\" Mine (McKean Mine) (1906-?), a drift mine, non-gaseous, mining a 38\" thick seam of Lower Kittaning coal using compressed air machines; ventilation provided by an 8' Stine steam-powered fan, Clymer, PA. Rodkey Mine(1906-?), a drift mine, Clymer. Ernest Mine No. 2 (1903-1965), a drift mine, at Ernest, Rayne Twp., Indiana Co., PA.[14] Tennessee[edit] The Fork Mountain, TN, drift portal entered an 84-inch unnamed seam of coal (see picture above). Most coal seams in Tennessee were not this thick.[15] West Virginia[edit] Many, many references to and photographs of WV drift mines in the Scrapbook of Appalachian Coal Towns,[16] including Sprague, Kaymoor, Nuttallburg, Venus, Layland, Elverton, Casselman (aka Castleman), etc. Historical US drift mining (gold)[edit] Alaska[edit] Drift mining methods were used extensively to mine placer deposits during the early years (1899- ) of the Nome mining district. During summer, surface deposits could be worked, but some placer deposits were buried too deeply for surface placering. In addition, water to wash the gold from the placers was not available in the winter. Many miners tunneled into deep placer deposits, bringing out the high-grade gravels to be washed at the spring thaw. Most of the ground in Nome is permafrost. By drift mining, miners were able to recover much of the gold buried under the permafrost. Gold at Nome was concentrated in three ancient beach lines, now inshore, above sea level, and buried under roughly fifty feet of permafrost overlain by two feet of tundra. Gold was usually found on top of \"false bedrock,\" a layer of clay that occurred at the base of the beach or stream deposit. Miners initially sank shafts to prospect for the pay streaks by building a fire atop the permafrost, then as it melted, shoveling away the mud. The process would continue down to either a pay streak or bedrock. When gold was found drift mining began. Miners would tunnel horizontally from the bottom of their prospect shaft to follow the gold along the surface of the bedrock. The tunnels did not cave in because the ground was frozen. Miners discovered old underground beach and river gravels rich with gold. Around 1900 the population of Nome was more than twenty thousand, many of them drift miners. Nome's gold fields, appearing untouched from the surface, are honeycombed with tunnels left by the gold rush drift miners. Today's miners, prospecting with modern drilling equipment, sometimes hit old drifts; this was, and is, a technique copied from the Welsh coal miners of south Wales and is much more effective than using bell pits. California[edit] Gold has been mined from placer gold deposits up and down the state and in different types of environment. Initially, rich, easily discovered, surface and river placers were mined until about 1864. Hydraulic mines, using powerful water cannons to wash whole hillsides, were the chief sources of gold for the next 20 years. In 1884, Judge Lorenzo Sawyer issued a decree prohibiting the dumping of hydraulic mining debris into the Sacramento River, effectively eliminating large-scale hydraulic operations. For the next 14 years, drift mining placer gold deposits in buried Tertiary channels partially made up for the loss of placer gold production, but overall production declined. Production rose again with the advent of large-scale dredging. The first successful gold dredge was introduced on the lower Feather River near Oroville in 1898.[17] Historical drift mines in other countries[edit] This section is empty. You can help by adding to it. (December 2015) Drift mines in current production[edit] This section is empty. You can help by adding to it. (December 2015) Safety and environmental issues[edit] Profile of hillseam occurrence Drift mines in eastern Kentucky are subject to roof collapse due to hillseams, especially within 100 feet of the portal. In 1989 the U.S. Bureau of Mines published a study of eastern Kentucky drift mines as part of an ongoing research program to characterize the outcrop barrier zone. \"Hillseams\" were identified as the dominant geologic cause of roof instability unique to the outcrop barrier zone, with many roof fall injuries and fatalities attributed to them. Hillseam is the eastern Kentucky miners term for weather-enlarged tension joints that occur in shallow mine overburden where surface slopes are steep. Hillseams are most conspicuous within 200\u00a0ft laterally of a coalbed outcrop and under 300\u00a0ft or less of overburden. Hillseams form by stress relief, and therefore tend to parallel topographic contours and ridges. They can intersect at various angles, especially under the nose of a ridge, and create massive blocks or wedges of roof prone to failure. Examples of hillseams are described in both outcrop and in coal mine roof to establish their geologic character and contribution to roof failure.[18] See also[edit] Shaft mining Slope mining References[edit] ^ Paul W. Thrush, A Dictionary of Mining, Mineral, and Related Terms, US Bureau of Mines, 1968, p.350. ^ \"Glossary of Mining Terms.\" Kentucky Foundation, Coal and Energy Education Project. 1996. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coaleducation.org/glossary.htm> Archived October 5, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. ^ drift-mine. Dictionary.com. Dictionary.com Unabridged. Random House, Inc. <http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/drift-mine> (accessed: December 27, 2015). ^ Paul W. Thrush, A Dictionary of Mining, Mineral, and Related Terms, US Bureau of Mines, 1968, p.350. ^ \"Glossary of Mining Terms.\" Kentucky Foundation, Coal and Energy Education Project. 1996. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coaleducation.org/glossary.htm> Archived October 5, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. ^ \"Drift | Mining.\" Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica Online. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.britannica.com/technology/drift-mining>. ^ \"Argyle Lake State Park.\" About. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.dnr.illinois.gov/Parks/About/Pages/ArgyleLake.aspx>. ^ DellaMea, Chris. \"Upper Youghiogheny Coalfield.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/westmd/upperyough/upperyough.htm>. ^ \"Working in a Drift Mine.\" DNR Reclamation Posters. August 29, 2005. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.in.gov/dnr/reclamation/files/re-driftmine.pdf>. ^ \"Kentucky Coal Heritage.\" Kentucky Foundation, Coal and Energy Education Project. 1996. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coaleducation.org/coalhistory/default_H.htm> Archived December 29, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. ^ DellaMea, Chris. \"Eastern Kentucky Coalfields.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/eastky/elkhorn/elkhorn.htm>. ^ DellaMea, Chris. \"Upper Youghiogheny Coalfield.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/westmd/upperyough/upperyough.htm>. ^ Roy, Andrew. \"Mines and Mining Resources of Ohio.\" Mines and Mining Resources of Ohio. 1888. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~henryhowesbook/mines.html>. ^ Washlaski, Raymond, and Ryan Washlaski. \"Virtual Museum of Coal Mining in Western Pennsylvania.\" September 18, 2010. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://patheoldminer.rootsweb.ancestry.com/>. ^ DellaMea, Chris. \"Eastern Tennessee Coalfields.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/tennessee-coal-mines/tennessee-coal-mines.htm>. ^ \"A Scrapbook of Appalachian Coal Towns\" <http://www.coalcampusa.com/>. ^ Silva, Michael. \"Placer Gold Recovery Methods (SP87).\" California Department of Conservation Division of Mines and Geology. 1986. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.conservation.ca.gov/cgs/geologic_resources/gold/documents/sp87.pdf.[permanent dead link]> ^ Sames, Gary, and Noel Moebs. \"Hillseam Geology and Roof Instability near Outcrop in Eastern Kentucky Drift Mines.\" U.S. Bureau of Mines. 1989. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/10524/cdc_10524_DS1.pdf>. External links[edit] Sketches showing various mining methods \"A Scrapbook of Appalachian Coal Towns\" with many references to individual drift mines. vteMining techniquesSurface Open-pit Quarrying Strip Placer Dredging Hydraulic mining Mountaintop removal Sub-surfaceClasses Hard rock Soft rock Directions Drift Slope Shaft Bell pit Borehole Stoping Room and pillar Longwall Retreat Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Drift_mining&oldid=873209761\" Categories: Underground miningMining engineeringHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2016Articles with permanently dead external linksArticles with short descriptionAll accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from September 2018Articles to be expanded from December 2015All articles to be expandedArticles with empty sections from December 2015All articles with empty sectionsArticles using small message boxes Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces ArticleTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version Languages Simple English Edit links This page was last edited on 11 December 2018, at 19:45\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "Drift mining - Howling Pixel Howling Pixel Drift mining Drift mining is either the mining of an ore deposit by underground methods, or the working of coal seams accessed by adits driven into the surface outcrop of the coal bed.[1] A drift mine is an underground mine in which the entry or access is above water level and generally on the slope of a hill, driven horizontally into the ore seam.[2] Random House dictionary says the origin of the term \"drift mine\" is an Americanism, circa 1885\u20131890.[3] Drift is a more general mining term, meaning a near-horizontal passageway in a mine, following the bed (of coal, for instance) or vein of ore. A drift may or may not intersect the ground surface.[4] A drift follows the vein, as distinguished from a crosscut that intersects it, or a level or gallery, which may do either.[5] All horizontal or subhorizontal development openings made in a mine have the generic name of drift. These are simply tunnels made in the rock, with a size and shape depending on their use\u2014for example, haulage, ventilation, or exploration.[6] Historical US drift mining (coal)Coal miner standing in a drift portal at Fork Mountain, Tennessee, 1920. This section provides a very abbreviated snapshot of the drift mining information generally available. IllinoisArgyle Lake State Park's website says the Argyle Hollow (occupied by a lake since 1948) has been rich in coal, clay and limestone resources. Historically, individuals commonly opened and dug their own \"drift mines\" to supplement their income.[7] In Appalachia, small coal mining operations such as these were known as \"country bank\" or \"farmer\" coal mines, and usually produced only small quantities for local use.[8] IndianaThe Lusk Mine, now in Turkey Run State Park, was in operation from the late 1800s through the late 1920s. Too small for commercial operation, the mine probably provided coal for the Lusk family and later for the park.[9] KentuckyIn 1820 the first commercial mine in Kentucky, known as the \"McLean drift bank\" opened near the Green River and Paradise in Muhlenberg County.[10] In Drift, Kentucky, Beaver Coal & Mining Company was the most well known operator of mines, but there were other smaller mines (Floyd-Elkhorn Consolidated Collieries, Turner-Elkhorn Coal Company, etc.) as well.[11] MarylandDorsey Coal Company's Ashby coal mine, a small drift mine probably in the Upper Freeport coal; and the mine of the Taylor-Offutt Coal Company near Oakland, MD.[12] OhioIn the 1880s, State Inspector of Mines, Andrew Roy, issued a report on the Mines and Mining Resources of Ohio,[13] which includes the following paragraphs: The capacity or output of the mines of the State varies greatly. Thick coals are capable of a greater daily output than thin seams, and as a general rule drift mines possess greater advantages for loading coal rapidly than shaft mining openings. In many of the mines of the great vein region of the Hocking valley the capacity is equal to 1,200 to 1,500 tons per day. In shaft mines 600 to 700 tons daily is regarded as a good output. The first ton of coal in a shaft mine 100 feet in depth and having a daily capacity of 600 tons frequently costs the mining adventurer upwards of $20,000 (1888), and cases are on record where owing to the extraordinary amount of water in sinking, $100,000 (1888) have been expended before coal was reached. Drift mines, as they require no machinery for pumping water and raising coal, cost less than half the amount required in shaft mining. Water is, however, an expensive item in drift mines opened on the dip slope of the coal, and underground hauling under such conditions is unusually costly. Drift mine entry in West Virginia, 1908. Photo by Lewis Hine. PennsylvaniaIndiana County: Graff Drift Mines, near Blairsville. Commodore Mines, Nos. 1 & 3 (drift mines), No. 2 (slope mine), Green Twp. Empire \"F\" Mine (1910-?), Shanktown; a drift mine, mining the \"B\" coal seam, mining done by machine, owner Pioneer Coal Company, Clearfield. Empire \"M\" Mine (McKean Mine) (1906-?), a drift mine, non-gaseous, mining a 38\" thick seam of Lower Kittaning coal using compressed air machines; ventilation provided by an 8' Stine steam-powered fan, Clymer, PA. Rodkey Mine(1906-?), a drift mine, Clymer. Ernest Mine No. 2 (1903-1965), a drift mine, at Ernest, Rayne Twp., Indiana Co., PA.[14] TennesseeThe Fork Mountain, TN, drift portal entered an 84-inch unnamed seam of coal (see picture above). Most coal seams in Tennessee were not this thick.[15] West VirginiaMany, many references to and photographs of WV drift mines in the Scrapbook of Appalachian Coal Towns,[16] including Sprague, Kaymoor, Nuttallburg, Venus, Layland, Elverton, Casselman (aka Castleman), etc. Historical US drift mining (gold)AlaskaDrift mining methods were used extensively to mine placer deposits during the early years (1899- ) of the Nome mining district. During summer, surface deposits could be worked, but some placer deposits were buried too deeply for surface placering. In addition, water to wash the gold from the placers was not available in the winter. Many miners tunneled into deep placer deposits, bringing out the high-grade gravels to be washed at the spring thaw. Most of the ground in Nome is permafrost. By drift mining, miners were able to recover much of the gold buried under the permafrost. Gold at Nome was concentrated in three ancient beach lines, now inshore, above sea level, and buried under roughly fifty feet of permafrost overlain by two feet of tundra. Gold was usually found on top of \"false bedrock,\" a layer of clay that occurred at the base of the beach or stream deposit. Miners initially sank shafts to prospect for the pay streaks by building a fire atop the permafrost, then as it melted, shoveling away the mud. The process would continue down to either a pay streak or bedrock. When gold was found drift mining began. Miners would tunnel horizontally from the bottom of their prospect shaft to follow the gold along the surface of the bedrock. The tunnels did not cave in because the ground was frozen. Miners discovered old underground beach and river gravels rich with gold. Around 1900 the population of Nome was more than twenty thousand, many of them drift miners. Nome's gold fields, appearing untouched from the surface, are honeycombed with tunnels left by the gold rush drift miners. Today's miners, prospecting with modern drilling equipment, sometimes hit old drifts; this was, and is, a technique copied from the Welsh coal miners of south Wales and is much more effective than using bell pits. CaliforniaGold has been mined from placer gold deposits up and down the state and in different types of environment. Initially, rich, easily discovered, surface and river placers were mined until about 1864. Hydraulic mines, using powerful water cannons to wash whole hillsides, were the chief sources of gold for the next 20 years. In 1884, Judge Lorenzo Sawyer issued a decree prohibiting the dumping of hydraulic mining debris into the Sacramento River, effectively eliminating large-scale hydraulic operations. For the next 14 years, drift mining placer gold deposits in buried Tertiary channels partially made up for the loss of placer gold production, but overall production declined. Production rose again with the advent of large-scale dredging. The first successful gold dredge was introduced on the lower Feather River near Oroville in 1898.[17] Safety and environmental issuesProfile of hillseam occurrence Drift mines in eastern Kentucky are subject to roof collapse due to hillseams, especially within 100 feet of the portal. In 1989 the U.S. Bureau of Mines published a study of eastern Kentucky drift mines as part of an ongoing research program to characterize the outcrop barrier zone. \"Hillseams\" were identified as the dominant geologic cause of roof instability unique to the outcrop barrier zone, with many roof fall injuries and fatalities attributed to them. Hillseam is the eastern Kentucky miners term for weather-enlarged tension joints that occur in shallow mine overburden where surface slopes are steep. Hillseams are most conspicuous within 200\u00a0ft laterally of a coalbed outcrop and under 300\u00a0ft or less of overburden. Hillseams form by stress relief, and therefore tend to parallel topographic contours and ridges. They can intersect at various angles, especially under the nose of a ridge, and create massive blocks or wedges of roof prone to failure. Examples of hillseams are described in both outcrop and in coal mine roof to establish their geologic character and contribution to roof failure.[18] See alsoShaft mining Slope miningReferences ^ Paul W. Thrush, A Dictionary of Mining, Mineral, and Related Terms, US Bureau of Mines, 1968, p.350. ^ \"Glossary of Mining Terms.\" Kentucky Foundation, Coal and Energy Education Project. 1996. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coaleducation.org/glossary.htm> Archived October 5, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. ^ drift-mine. Dictionary.com. Dictionary.com Unabridged. Random House, Inc. <http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/drift-mine> (accessed: December 27, 2015). ^ Paul W. Thrush, A Dictionary of Mining, Mineral, and Related Terms, US Bureau of Mines, 1968, p.350. ^ \"Glossary of Mining Terms.\" Kentucky Foundation, Coal and Energy Education Project. 1996. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coaleducation.org/glossary.htm> Archived October 5, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. ^ \"Drift | Mining.\" Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica Online. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.britannica.com/technology/drift-mining>. ^ \"Argyle Lake State Park.\" About. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.dnr.illinois.gov/Parks/About/Pages/ArgyleLake.aspx>. ^ DellaMea, Chris. \"Upper Youghiogheny Coalfield.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/westmd/upperyough/upperyough.htm>. ^ \"Working in a Drift Mine.\" DNR Reclamation Posters. August 29, 2005. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.in.gov/dnr/reclamation/files/re-driftmine.pdf>. ^ \"Kentucky Coal Heritage.\" Kentucky Foundation, Coal and Energy Education Project. 1996. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coaleducation.org/coalhistory/default_H.htm> Archived December 29, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. ^ DellaMea, Chris. \"Eastern Kentucky Coalfields.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/eastky/elkhorn/elkhorn.htm>. ^ DellaMea, Chris. \"Upper Youghiogheny Coalfield.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/westmd/upperyough/upperyough.htm>. ^ Roy, Andrew. \"Mines and Mining Resources of Ohio.\" Mines and Mining Resources of Ohio. 1888. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~henryhowesbook/mines.html>. ^ Washlaski, Raymond, and Ryan Washlaski. \"Virtual Museum of Coal Mining in Western Pennsylvania.\" September 18, 2010. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://patheoldminer.rootsweb.ancestry.com/>. ^ DellaMea, Chris. \"Eastern Tennessee Coalfields.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/tennessee-coal-mines/tennessee-coal-mines.htm>. ^ \"A Scrapbook of Appalachian Coal Towns\" <http://www.coalcampusa.com/>. ^ Silva, Michael. \"Placer Gold Recovery Methods (SP87).\" California Department of Conservation Division of Mines and Geology. 1986. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.conservation.ca.gov/cgs/geologic_resources/gold/documents/sp87.pdf.> ^ Sames, Gary, and Noel Moebs. \"Hillseam Geology and Roof Instability near Outcrop in Eastern Kentucky Drift Mines.\" U.S. Bureau of Mines. 1989. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/10524/cdc_10524_DS1.pdf>. External linksSketches showing various mining methods \"A Scrapbook of Appalachian Coal Towns\" with many references to individual drift mines. Addie Camp, South Dakota Addie Camp, also known as Kennedyville, Addie Spur, or Canadaville (USGS maps only), is a ghost town located in Pennington County, South Dakota, United States. It was a mining camp in the Black Hills. Adit An adit (from Latin aditus, entrance) is an entrance to an underground mine which is horizontal or nearly horizontal, by which the mine can be entered, drained of water, ventilated, and minerals extracted at the lowest convenient level. Adits are also used to explore for mineral veins. Andrew Roy Andrew Roy may refer to:Drew Roy, Andrew Roy, actorAndrew Roy (sailor), in Laser World ChampionshipsAndrew Roy (figure skater) in Australian Figure Skating ChampionshipsAndrew Roy, (1880s) Ohio State Inspector of Mines, Drift mining Bell pit A bell pit is a primitive method of mining coal, iron ore or other minerals where the coal or ore lies near the surface. Blue Tent, California Blue Tent is a historic 19th century gold mining community located about six miles northeast of Nevada City, California.Its approximate location is at the intersection of N. Bloomfield Road and Blue Tent School Road. It was part of Nevada Township. Clarence Berry Clarence Jesse Berry (1867\u20131930), known as C.J., was a businessman and successful gold miner in the Klondike Gold Rush. He and his wife, Ethel Bush Berry, made a further fortune in Ester, Alaska, in 1902, and founded several oil companies over the years, which eventually became Berry Petroleum Company.In Ester, Berry pioneered the use of the cold water point and the steam point, used to thaw frozen soil and permafrost in a safer manner for drift mining than boring shafts using hot rocks or underground fires, which rendered the excavations and tunnels far more susceptible to collapse. The Berrys operated No. 8 Below Discovery Claim. Clifton, West Yorkshire Clifton is a small village, near Brighouse, in the metropolitan borough of Calderdale in West Yorkshire, England. East Chevington East Chevington is a parish in Northumberland, England, and was a village until it disappeared in the 1900s.In 2001, the parish had a population of 3,192, increasing to 3,951 at the 2011 Census. Hetton-le-Hole Hetton-le-Hole is a town and civil parish situated in the City of Sunderland, Tyne and Wear, England. Historically in County Durham, it is on the A182 between Houghton-le-Spring and Easington Lane, at the southwest corner of Sunderland, off the A690 and close to the A1(M). It has a population of 14,402 including the village of Easington Lane and Warden Law.The civil parish includes Hetton proper, along with East Rainton, Middle Rainton (but not West Rainton which is a separate parish), Low Moorsley, High Moorsley and Easington Lane. South Hetton is a separate parish.Great Eppleton Wind Farm, a wind farm originally of four dual-bladed alternators, provides electricity to the National Grid. The original wind turbines have been replaced by larger three-bladed versions. The turbines are far enough away from local houses not to cause any audible disturbance. Lethbridge Lethbridge is a city in the province of Alberta, Canada, and the largest city in southern Alberta. It is Alberta's fourth-largest city by population after Calgary, Edmonton and Red Deer, and the third-largest by land area after Calgary and Edmonton. The nearby Canadian Rockies contribute to the city's warm summers, mild winters, and windy climate. Lethbridge lies southeast of Calgary on the Oldman River.Lethbridge is the commercial, financial, transportation and industrial centre of southern Alberta. The city's economy developed from drift mining for coal in the late 19th century and agriculture in the early 20th century. Half of the workforce is employed in the health, education, retail and hospitality sectors, and the top five employers are government-based. The only university in Alberta south of Calgary is in Lethbridge, and two of the three colleges in southern Alberta have campuses in the city. Cultural venues in the city include performing art theatres, museums and sports centres. Limb Brook The Limb Brook is a stream in Sheffield, South Yorkshire, England. It rises at the village of Ringinglow, flowing east through Whirlow and Ecclesall Woods into Abbeydale in the Beauchief area, where it merges with the River Sheaf. Near this point part of the stream has been diverted to provide the goit for the Abbeydale Industrial Hamlet millpond, and this channel flows through what is now Beauchief Gardens. Mining in Wales Mining in Wales provided a significant source of income to the economy of Wales throughout the nineteenth century and early twentieth century. It was key to the Industrial Revolution.Wales was famous for its coal mining, in the Rhondda Valley, the South Wales Valleys and throughout the South Wales coalfield and by 1913 Barry had become the largest coal exporting port in the world, with Cardiff as second, as coal was transported down by rail. Northeast Wales also had its own coalfield and Tower Colliery (closed January 2008) near Hirwaun is regarded by many as the oldest open coal mine and one of the largest in the world. Wales has also had a significant history of mining for slate, gold and various metal ores. Ogmore Vale Ogmore Vale (Welsh: Cwm Ogwr) is a village in the county borough of Bridgend, Wales on the River Ogmore. The village's main source of income came from coal mining. Up until the year 1865, the Ogmore valley was a quiet, isolated, rural hill farming community of less than ten farms and a few cottages. Today, along with Nantymoel and Price Town it makes up the community of Ogmore Valley. Pittsburg-Weir Coalfield The Pittsburg-Weir Coalfield, also known as Weir-Pittsburg Coalfield and Cherokee Coalfield, is a coalfield located in Cherokee and Crawford counties in the southeast corner of Kansas.The first underground shaft mine was built in the region in 1874 near Scammon. Prior to that, there was scattered small-scale drift mining and surface mining of coal, but the construction of the first shaft mine ushered in an era which eventually led to as many as 290 significant mines and numerous other small (\"dinky\") mines in the two counties. The most active period of mining in the region was 1890-1910, and most of the coal camps were dismantled by the 1930s or 1940s. Mechanized strip mining overtook underground mining in output in 1931, and that combined with competition from eastern coal led to a demise in importance of underground mining in the region. Placer deposit In geology, a placer deposit or placer is an accumulation of valuable minerals formed by gravity separation from a specific source rock during sedimentary processes. The name is from the Spanish word placer, meaning \"alluvial sand\". Placer mining is an important source of gold, and was the main technique used in the early years of many gold rushes, including the California Gold Rush. Types of placer deposits include alluvium, eluvium, beach placers, and paleoplacers.Placer materials must be both dense and resistant to weathering processes. To accumulate in placers, mineral particles must be significantly denser than quartz (whose specific gravity is 2.65), as quartz is usually the largest component of sand or gravel. Placer environments typically contain black sand, a conspicuous shiny black mixture of iron oxides, mostly magnetite with variable amounts of ilmenite and hematite. Valuable mineral components often occurring with black sands are monazite, rutile, zircon, chromite, wolframite, and cassiterite. Remington Hill, California Remington Hill is a historic mining camp in Nevada County, California which prospered in the second half of the 19th century. It was named for Caleb Remington, a prominent local miner who lived mostly in neighboring Little York, where he died in 1865. It lay at an elevation of 4052 feet (1235 m). It was situated around present Chalk Bluff Road about one mile south of Highway 20 and about 5.5 miles southeast of the town of Washington and 6 miles northeast of Dutch Flat, as the crow flies. Ringinglow Ringinglow is a village in the western section of Sheffield, England. It is on the western border of Ecclesall Ward, and although it is within the boundary of Sheffield, it is self-contained, being entirely surrounded by open countryside. The village now falls within the Fulwood ward of the City. The village is focussed on the intersections of Fulwood Lane and Sheephill Road (historically this section was known as Houndkirk Road) with Ringinglow Road. The sources of the Porter Brook and Limb Brook, both tributaries of the River Sheaf, are near the village. The Norfolk Arms, a pub in the village, is often used as a staging-post by ramblers following one of these rivers out of Sheffield towards the Peak District National Park, the eastern boundary of which runs through the village. Techatticup Mine Techatticup Mine, is a former gold mine, now a tourist attraction. It is located at an elevation of 2,477 feet (755 m), midway in Eldorado Canyon, in Clark County, Nevada. You Bet, California You Bet is a small unincorporated community in Nevada County, California. You Bet is located in the Sierra Nevada foothills, 7 miles (11.3 km) east of Grass Valley and 5.5 miles (8.9 km) northeast of Chicago Park.Mining techniquesSurface Open-pit Quarrying Strip Placer Dredging Hydraulic mining Mountaintop removal Sub-surfaceClasses Hard rock Soft rock Directions Drift Slope Shaft Bell pit Borehole Stoping Room and pillar Longwall Retreat This page is based on a Wikipedia article written by authors (here). Text is available under the CC BY-SA 3.0 license; additional terms may apply. Images, videos and audio are available under their respective licenses. Privacy Terms of Use Contact About \u00a9 2019 Howling Pixel", "Drift mining - Infogalactic: the planetary knowledge core Drift mining From Infogalactic: the planetary knowledge core Jump to:\t\t\t\t\tnavigation, \t\t\t\t\tsearch Drift mining is either the mining of an ore deposit by underground methods, or the working of coal seams accessed by adits driven into the surface outcrop of the coal bed.[1] A Drift Mine is an underground mine in which the entry or access is above water level and generally on the slope of a hill, driven horizontally into the ore seam.[2] Random House dictionary says the origin of the term \"drift mine\" is an Americanism, circa 1885-1890.[3] Drift is a more general mining term, meaning a near-horizontal passageway in a mine, following the bed (of coal, for instance) or vein of ore. A drift may or may not intersect the ground surface.[4] A Drift is a horizontal passage underground. A drift follows the vein, as distinguished from a crosscut that intersects it, or a level or gallery, which may do either.[5] All horizontal or subhorizontal development openings made in a mine have the generic name of drift. These are simply tunnels made in the rock, with a size and shape depending on their use\u2014for example, haulage, ventilation, or exploration.[6] Contents 1 Historical US drift mining (coal) 2 Historical US drift mining (gold) 3 Historical drift mines in other countries 4 Drift mines in current production 5 Safety and environmental issues 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Historical US drift mining (coal) Coal miner standing in a drift portal at Fork Mountain, TN, 1920. This section provides a very abbreviated snapshot of the drift mining information generally available. Illinois: Argyle Lake State Park's website says the Argyle Hollow (occupied by a lake since 1948) region has been rich in coal, clay and limestone resources. Historically, individuals commonly opened and dug their own \"drift mines\" to supplement their income.[7] In Appalachia, small coal mining operations such as these were known as \"country bank\" or \"farmer\" coal mines, and usually produced only small quantities for local use.[8] Indiana: The Lusk Mine, now in Turkey Run State Park, was in operation from the late 1800s through the late 1920s. Too small for commercial operation, the mine probably provided coal for the Lusk family and later for the park.[9] Kentucky: In 1820 the first commercial mine in Kentucky, known as the \"McLean drift bank\" opened near the Green River and Paradise in Muhlenberg County.[10] In Drift, KY, Beaver Coal & Mining Company was the most well known operator of mines, but there were other smaller mines (Floyd-Elkhorn Consolidated Collieries, Turner-Elkhorn Coal Company, etc.) as well.[11] Maryland: Dorsey Coal Company's Ashby coal mine, a small drift mine probably in the Upper Freeport coal; and the mine of the Taylor-Offutt Coal Company near Oakland, MD.[12] Ohio: In the 1880s, State Inspector of Mines, Andrew Roy, issued a report on the The Mines and Mining Resources of Ohio,[13] which includes the following paragraphs: The capacity or output of the mines of the State varies greatly. Thick coals are capable of a greater daily output than thin seams, and as a general rule drift mines possess greater advantages for loading coal rapidly than shaft openings. In many of the mines of the great vein region of the Hocking valley the capacity is equal to 1,200 to 1,500 tons per day. In shaft mines 600 to 700 tons daily is regarded as a good output. The first ton of coal in a shaft mine 100 feet in depth and having a daily capacity of 600 tons frequently costs the mining adventurer upwards of $20,000 (1888), and cases are on record where owing to the extraordinary amount of water in sinking, $100,000 (1888) have been expended before coal was reached. Drift mines, as they require no machinery for pumping water and raising coal, cost less than half the amount required in shaft mining. Water is, however, an expensive item in drift mines opened on the dip of the coal, and underground hauling under such conditions is unusually costly.[14] Drift mine entry in West Virginia, 1908. Photo by Lewis Hine. Pennsylvania: Indiana County: Graff Drift Mines, near Blairsville. Commodore Mines, Nos. 1 & 3 (drift mines), No. 2 (slope mine), Green Twp. Empire \"F\" Mine (1910-?), Shanktown; a drift mine, mining the \"B\" coal seam, mining done by machine, owner Pioneer Coal Company, Clearfield. Empire \"M\" Mine (McKean Mine) (1906-?), a drift mine, non-gaseous, mining a 38\" thick seam of Lower Kittaning coal using compressed air machines; ventilation provided by a 8' Stine steam-powered fan, Clymer, PA. Rodkey Mine(1906-?), a drift mine, Clymer. Ernest Mine No. 2 (1903-1965), a drift mine, at Ernest, Rayne Twp., Indiana Co., PA.[15] Tennessee: The Fork Mountain, TN, drift portal entered an 84-inch unnamed seam of coal (see picture). Most coal seams in Tennessee were not this thick.[16] West Virginia: Many, many references to and photographs of WV drift mines in the Scrapbook of Appalachian Coal Towns,[17] including Sprague, Kaymoor, Nuttallburg, Venus, Layland, Elverton, Casselman (aka Castleman), etc. Historical US drift mining (gold) Alaska: Drift mining methods were used extensively to mine placer deposits during the early years (1899- ) of the Nome mining district. During summer, surface deposits could be worked, but some placer deposits were buried too deeply for surface placering. In addition, water to wash the gold from the placers was not available in the winter. Many miners tunneled into deep placer deposits, bringing out the high-grade gravels to be washed at the spring thaw. Most of the ground in Nome is permafrost. By drift mining, miners were able to recover much of the gold buried under the permafrost. Gold at Nome was concentrated in three ancient beach lines, now inshore, above sea level, and buried under roughly fifty feet of permafrost overlain by two feet of tundra. Gold was usually found on top of \"false bedrock,\" a layer of clay that occurred at the base of the beach or stream deposit. Miners initially sank shafts to prospect for the pay streaks by building a fire atop the permafrost, then as it melted, shoveling away the mud. The process would continue down to either a pay streak or bedrock. When gold was found drift mining began. Miners would tunnel horizontally from the bottom of their prospect shaft to follow the gold along the surface of the bedrock. The tunnels did not cave in because the ground was frozen. Miners discovered old underground beach and river gravels rich with gold. Around 1900 the population of Nome was more than twenty thousand, many of them drift miners. Nome's gold fields, appearing untouched from the surface, are honeycombed with tunnels left by the gold rush drift miners. Today's miners, prospecting with modern drilling equipment, sometimes hit old drifts; this was, and is, a technique copied from the Welsh coal miners of south Wales and is much more effective than using bell pits. California: Gold has been mined from placer gold deposits up and down the state and in different types of environment. Initially, rich, easily discovered, surface and river placers were mined until about 1864. Hydraulic mines, using powerful water cannons to wash whole hillsides, were the chief sources of gold for the next 20 years. In 1884, Judge Lorenzo Sawyer issued a decree prohibiting the dumping of hydraulic mining debris into the Sacramento River, effectively eliminating large-scale hydraulic operations. For the next 14 years, drift mining placer gold deposits in buried Tertiary channels partially made up for the loss of placer gold production, but overall production declined. Production rose again with the advent of large-scale dredging. The first successful gold dredge was introduced on the lower Feather River near Oroville in 1898.[18] Historical drift mines in other countries This section is empty. You can help by adding to it. (December 2015) Drift mines in current production This section is empty. You can help by adding to it. (December 2015) Safety and environmental issues Profile of hillseam occurrence Drift mines in eastern Kentucky are subject to roof collapse due to hillseams, especially within 100 feet of the portal. In 1989 the U.S. Bureau of Mines published a study of eastern Kentucky drift mines as part of an ongoing research program to characterize the outcrop barrier zone. \"Hillseams\" were identified as the dominant geologic cause of roof instability unique to the outcrop barrier zone, with many roof fall injuries and fatalities attributed to them. Hillseam is the eastern Kentucky miners term for weather-enlarged tension joints that occur in shallow mine overburden where surface slopes are steep. Hillseams are most conspicuous within 200\u00a0ft laterally of a coalbed outcrop and under 300\u00a0ft or less of overburden. Hillseams form by stress relief, and therefore tend to parallel topographic contours and ridges. They can intersect at various angles, especially under the nose of a ridge, and create massive blocks or wedges of roof prone to failure. Examples of hillseams are described in both outcrop and in coal mine roof to establish their geologic character and contribution to roof failure.[19] See also Shaft mining Slope mining References \u2191 Paul W. Thrush, A Dictionary of Mining, Mineral, and Related Terms, US Bureau of Mines, 1968, p.350. \u2191 \"Glossary of Mining Terms.\" Kentucky Foundation, Coal and Energy Education Project. 1996. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coaleducation.org/glossary.htm>. \u2191 drift-mine. Dictionary.com. Dictionary.com Unabridged. Random House, Inc. <http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/drift-mine> (accessed: December 27, 2015). \u2191 Paul W. Thrush, A Dictionary of Mining, Mineral, and Related Terms, US Bureau of Mines, 1968, p.350. \u2191 \"Glossary of Mining Terms.\" Kentucky Foundation, Coal and Energy Education Project. 1996. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coaleducation.org/glossary.htm>. \u2191 \"Drift | Mining.\" Encyclopedia Britannica Online. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.britannica.com/technology/drift-mining>. \u2191 \"Argyle Lake State Park.\" About. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.dnr.illinois.gov/Parks/About/Pages/ArgyleLake.aspx>. \u2191 DellaMea, Chris. \"Upper Youghiogheny Coalfield.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/westmd/upperyough/upperyough.htm>. \u2191 \"Working in a Drift Mine.\" DNR Reclamation Posters. August 29, 2005. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.in.gov/dnr/reclamation/files/re-driftmine.pdf>. \u2191 \"Kentucky Coal Heritage.\" Kentucky Foundation, Coal and Energy Education Project. 1996. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coaleducation.org/coalhistory/default_H.htm>. \u2191 DellaMea, Chris. \"Eastern Kentucky Coalfields.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/eastky/elkhorn/elkhorn.htm>. \u2191 DellaMea, Chris. \"Upper Youghiogheny Coalfield.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/westmd/upperyough/upperyough.htm>. \u2191 Roy, Andrew. \"Mines and Mining Resources of Ohio.\" Mines and Mining Resources of Ohio. 1888. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~henryhowesbook/mines.html>. \u2191 Roy, Andrew. \"Mines and Mining Resources of Ohio.\" Mines and Mining Resources of Ohio. 1888. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~henryhowesbook/mines.html>. \u2191 Washlaski, Raymond, and Ryan Washlaski. \"Virtual Museum of Coal Mining in Western Pennsylvania.\" September 18, 2010. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://patheoldminer.rootsweb.ancestry.com/>. \u2191 DellaMea, Chris. \"Eastern Tennessee Coalfields.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/tennessee-coal-mines/tennessee-coal-mines.htm>. \u2191 \"A Scrapbook of Appalachian Coal Towns\" <http://www.coalcampusa.com/>. \u2191 Silva, Michael. \"Placer Gold Recovery Methods (SP87).\" California Department of Conservation Division of Mines and Geology. 1986. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.conservation.ca.gov/cgs/geologic_resources/gold/documents/sp87.pdf.> \u2191 Sames, Gary, and Noel Moebs. \"Hillseam Geology and Roof Instability near Outcrop in Eastern Kentucky Drift Mines.\" U.S. Bureau of Mines. 1989. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/10524/cdc_10524_DS1.pdf>. External links Sketches showing various mining methods \"A Scrapbook of Appalachian Coal Towns\" with many references to individual drift mines. v t e Mining techniques Surface Open-pit Quarrying Strip Placer Dredging Hydraulic mining Mountaintop removal Sub-surface Classes Hard rock Soft rock Directions Drift Slope Shaft Bell pit Borehole Stoping Room and pillar Longwall Retreat Retrieved from \"https://infogalactic.com/w/index.php?title=Drift_mining&oldid=4491268\" Categories: Articles to be expanded from December 2015Articles with empty sections from December 2015All articles with empty sectionsArticles using small message boxesUnderground miningMining engineeringHidden category: All articles to be expanded Navigation menu Personal tools Log inRequest account Namespaces Page Discussion Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main pageRecent changesRandom pageHelpInfogalactic NewsBuy an account Tools What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPrintable versionPermanent linkPage informationCite this page This page was last modified on 29 December 2015, at 09:36. Content is available under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License unless otherwise noted. This article's content derived from Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia (See original source). Privacy policy About Infogalactic: the planetary knowledge core Disclaimers Mobile view", "What Do the Weather Terms Mean? Menutimeanddate.comSearch \u00d7Site / ArticlesCity / CountrySocial \u00d7Share this page / Follow us on:FacebookTweetFollowTwitterVisit us on:FacebookTwitter BackMy accountMy LocationMy UnitsMy EventsMy World ClockMy PrivacyPaid ServicesSign inRegisterBackHomeNewsletterAbout UsSite MapAccount/SettingsArticle TopicsBackWorld ClockMain World ClockExtended World ClockPersonal World ClockWorld Time Lookup Time ArticlesBackTime ZonesTime Zone ConverterInternational Meeting PlannerEvent Time AnnouncerTime Zone MapTime Zone AbbreviationsTime Zone NewsDaylight Saving TimeTime Changes WorldwideTime DifferenceTime Zone ArticlesBackCalendarCalendar InfoCalendar 2019Calendar 2020Monthly CalendarPrintable Calendar (PDF)Add Your Own Calendar EventsCalendar CreatorAdvanced Calendar CreatorHolidays WorldwideOn This Day in HistoryCalendar ArticlesBackWeatherWorldwideLocal Weather2-Week ForecastHour-by-HourPast WeekClimateBackSun & MoonSun CalculatorMoon CalculatorMoon PhasesSeasonsEclipsesNight SkyDay and Night MapMoon Light World MapMeteor ShowersAstronomy ArticlesBackTimersStopwatchTimerCountdown to Any DateNew Year CountdownNew Year TriviaBackCalculatorsDate to Date Calculator (duration)Business Date to Date (exclude holidays)Date Calculator (add / subtract)Business Date (exclude holidays)International Dialing CodesDistance CalculatorDistance SignpostTravel Time CalculatorWeekday CalculatorWeek Number CalculatorBackApps & APIiOS AppsAndroid AppsWindows AppFree ClockFree CountdownAPI for DevelopersBackFree FunFree Clock for Your SiteFree Countdown for Your SiteWord ClockFun HolidaysAlternative Age CalculatorDate Pattern CalculatorFun Fact ArticlesHome \u00a0 Weather \u00a0 Weather Glossary \u2013 Terms & DefinitionsWeather Glossary \u2013 Terms & DefinitionsTerminology used in weather reports, forecasts, and readings. Names and words used to describe the weather and climate.Forecasts, past weather, and climate information for your locationA | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P | Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | ZTopAcid rainCloud or rain droplets containing pollutants, such as oxides of sulfur and nitrogen, to make them acidic (eg. pH < 5.6).AfternoonNoon to sunset.Arctic airA mass of very cold, dry air that usually originates over the Arctic Ocean north of Canada and Alaska.Arctic highA very cold high pressure that originates over the Arctic Ocean.TopBall lightningA relatively rarely seen form of lightning, generally consisting of an orange or reddish ball of the order of a few cm to 30cm in diameter and of moderate luminosity, which may move up to 1 m/s horizontally with a lifetime of a second or two.Barber poleA thunderstorm updraft with a visual appearance including cloud striations that are curved in a manner similar to the stripes of a barber pole. The structure typically is most pronounced on the leading edge of the updraft, while drier air from the rear flank downdraft often erodes the clouds on the trailing side of the updraft.BarometerAn instrument for measuring atmospheric pressure.Barometric pressureThe actual pressure value indicated by a pressure sensor.Bitterly coldIn winter, bitterly cold or very cold, refers to more than seven degrees Celsius below normal.Black iceThin, new ice that forms on fresh water or dew covered surfaces; it is common on roadways during the fall and early winter and appears \"black\" because of its transparency.BlizzardIncludes winter storm conditions of sustained winds or frequent gusts of 35 mph or more that cause major blowing and drifting of snow, reducing visibility to less than one-quarter mile for 3 or more hours. Extremely cold temperatures often are associated with dangerous blizzard conditions. In Canada, a blizzard described as a severe storm that lasts three or more hours, and brings low temperatures, strong winds and poor visibility due to blowing snow. In Australia, it is described as a violent and very cold wind which is loaded with snow, some of which has been raised from snow covered ground.Blocking highA high pressure area (anticyclone), often aloft, that remains nearly stationary or moves slowly compared to west-to-east motion. It blocks the movement eastward movement of low pressure areas (cyclones) at its latitude.Blowing DustDust that is raised by the wind to moderate heights above the ground to a degree that horizontal visibility decreases to less than seven miles. Visibilities of 1/8 mile or less over a widespread area are criteria for a Blowing Dust Advisory.Blowing sandSand particles picked up from the surface of the earth by the wind to moderate heights above the ground, reducing the reported horizontal visibility to less than seven statute miles.Blowing snowWind driven snow that reduces visibility to six miles or less causing significant drifting. Blowing snow may be snow that is falling and/or loose snow on the ground picked up by the wind. In Canada, it is described as snow that is lifted by the wind from the earth's surface to a height of two meters or more.Blowing sprayWater droplets torn by the wind from a body of water, generally from the crests of waves, and carried up into the air in such quantities that they reduce the reported horizontal visibility to less than seven statute miles.BlusteryDescriptive term for gusty winds that accompany cold weather.BreezyWind in the range of 15 miles per hour to 25 mile per hour with mild or warm temperatures.BriskWind in the range of 15 to 25 miles per hour when the temperature is cold.Broken cloudsClouds which cover between 5/8ths and 7/8ths of the sky.TopCalmThe absence of apparent motion in the air.CelsiusA temperature scale in which zero is the freezing point of water and one hundred is the boiling point.ChinookA Chinook is a warm, dry, gusty wind that occasionally occurs to the leeward side of a mountain range, particularly the Rocky Mountains.Cirrus cloudHigh cloud, delicate, hair-like and feathery looking.ClearSky condition of less than 1/10 cloud coverage.\tIn the United Kingdom, clear is defined as \u201cNo cloud\u201d, and in Australia, it is defined as \u201cVirtually cloud-free\u201d.Clear slotA local region of clearing skies or reduced cloud cover, indicating an intrusion of drier air; often seen as a bright area with higher cloud bases on the west or southwest side of a wall cloud.ClimateThe prevalent long term weather conditions in a particular area. Climatic elements include precipitation, temperature, humidity, sunshine and wind velocity and phenomena such as fog, frost, and hail storms. Climate cannot be considered a satisfactory indicator of actual conditions since it is based upon a vast number of elements taken as an average.CloudburstA sudden, intense rainfall that is normally of short duration.CloudyCloudy means that clouds cover more than 60 percent of the sky.Coastal flood warningIssued when there is widespread coastal flooding expected within 12 hours, more than just a typical overwash.ColdIn the winter, cold refers to four to seven degrees Celsius below normal.Cold Advection (CAA)Transport of cold air into a region by horizontal winds.Cold frontA narrow transition zone separating advancing colder air from retreating warmer air. The air behind a cold front is cooler and typically drier than the air it is replacing.Cold lowA low pressure system with cold air mass from near the surface to all vertical levels (also called a cold core low).Cold-air-funnelA funnel cloud or (rarely) a small, relatively weak tornado that can develop from a small shower or thunderstorm when the air aloft is unusually cold (hence the name). They are much less violent than other types of tornadoes.Collar cloudFrequently used as a synonym for wall cloud, although it actually is a generally circular ring of cloud surrounding the upper portion of a wall cloud.Combined seasThe combined height of swell and wind waves.CondensationThe process by which water vapor becomes a liquid; the opposite of evaporation, which is the conversion of liquid to vapor. In Australia, it is described as a change from a gas to a liquid.ConfluenceA pattern of wind flow in which air flows inward toward an axis oriented parallel to the general direction of flow. It is the opposite of difluence. Confluence is not the same as convergence. Winds often accelerate as they enter a confluent zone, resulting in speed divergence which offsets the (apparent) converging effect of the confluent flow.Congestus (or Cumulus congestus)A large cumulus cloud with great vertical development, usually with a cauliflower-like appearance, but lacking the characteristic anvil shaped top of a Cb (Cumulonimbus cloud).Continental air massA dry air mass originating over a large land area.ConvectionThe transfer of heat within the air by its movement. The term is used specifically to describe vertical transport of heat and moisture, especially by updrafts and downdrafts in an unstable atmosphere.ConvergenceAn atmospheric condition that exists when the winds cause a horizontal net inflow of air into a specified region. Divergence is the opposite, where winds cause a horizontal net outflow of air from a specified region.Cumulonimbus CloudA vertically developed cloud, often capped by an anvil shaped cloud. Also called a thunderstorm cloud, it is frequently accompanied by heavy showers, lightning, thunder, and sometimes hail or gusty winds. In Australia, it is described as a heavy, puffy, heaped, dark cloud of great vertical depth, often bringing rain. Some have a distinctive anvil shaped head. Cumulus cloudA cloud in the shape of individual detached domes, with a flat base and a bulging upper portion resembling cauliflower. In Australia, it is described as a cloud with a woolly, heaped appearance that often produces rain. Cumulus congestusA large cumulus cloud with great vertical development, usually with a cauliflower-like appearance, but lacking the characteristic anvil shaped top of a Cb (Cumulonimbus cloud).CycloneAn area of low pressure around which winds blow counterclockwise in the Northern Hemisphere. Also the term used for a hurricane in the Indian Ocean and in the Western Pacific Ocean. In Australia, it is described as atmospheric circulations that rotate clockwise in the southern hemisphere, and anti-clockwise in the northern hemisphere. Cyclones are areas of lower pressure and generally associated with stronger winds, unsettled conditions, cloudiness and rainfall.TopDaySunrise to sunset. Day of the week (eg. Monday)Midnight to midnight.Debris cloudA rotating \"cloud\" of dust or debris, near or on the ground, often appearing beneath a condensation funnel and surrounding the base of a tornado.Dense fogA fog in which the visibility is less than one-quarter mile.DepressionA region of low atmospheric pressure that is usually accompanied by low clouds and precipitation.Dew pointThe temperature to which the air must be cooled for water vapor to condense and form fog or clouds.Diamond dustA fall of non-branched (snow crystals are branched) ice crystals in the form of needles, columns, or plates.DifluenceA pattern of wind flow in which air moves outward (in a \"fan-out\" pattern) away from a central axis that is oriented parallel to the general direction of the flow. It is the opposite of confluence.\tDisturbanceA disruption of the atmosphere that usually refers to a low pressure area, cool air and inclement weather.\tDownburstA strong downdraft resulting in an outward burst of damaging winds on or near the ground. Downburst winds can produce damage similar to a strong tornado.\tDowndraftA column of generally cool air that rapidly sinks to the ground, usually accompanied by precipitation as in a shower or thunderstorm.\tDownslope windAir that descends an elevated plain and consequently warms and dries. Occurs when prevailing wind direction is from the same direction as the elevated terrain and often produces fair weather conditions.DraftA draft is a small gusty air current that moves upward or downward abruptly; hence the terms updraft and downdraft.Drifting snowUneven distribution of snowfall caused by strong surface winds. Drifting snow does not reduce visibility. In Canada, it is defined as snow blown to a height of less than two meters.DrizzleSmall, slowly falling water droplets, with diameters between .2 and .5 millimeters. In Australia, it is defined as fairly uniform precipitation (rain) composed exclusively of very small water droplets (less than 0.5 mm in diameter) very close to one another. DroughtAbnormally dry weather in a region over an extended period sufficient to cause a serious hydrological (water cycle) imbalance in the affected area. This can cause such problems as crop damage and water-supply shortage. In Australia, it is defined as the prolonged absence or marked deficiency of precipitation (rain).DryFree from rain. Normally used when preceding weather has also been relatively dry and dry weather is expected to continue for a day or so.Dust stormAn area where high surface winds have picked up loose dust, reducing visibility to less than one-half mile. In Australia, it is described as a storm which carries large amounts of dust into the atmosphere.TopEarlyUntil two hours after sunrise.El Ni\u00f1oA major warming of the equatorial waters in the eastern Pacific Ocean. El Ni\u00f1o events usually occur every three to seven years, and are related to shifts in global weather patterns. (Spanish for the \"Christ Child\u201d because it often begins around Christmas.)EvaporationThe process of a liquid changing into a vapor or gas. EveningSunset to midnight.Extended outlookA basic forecast of general weather conditions three to five days in the future.Extratropical cycloneA storm that forms outside the tropics, sometimes as a tropical storm or hurricane changes. See table below for differences between extratropical and tropical cyclones.TopFahrenheitThe standard scale used to measure temperature in the United States; in which the freezing point of water is 32 degrees and the boiling point is 212 degrees.FairDescribes weather in which there is less than 4/10ths of opaque cloud cover, no precipitation, and there is no extreme visibility, wind or temperature conditions.Fall windA strong, cold, downslope wind.FineNo rain or other precipitation (hail, snow etc.). The use of fine is generally avoided in excessively cloudy, windy, foggy or dusty conditions. In particular note that fine means the absence of rain or other precipitation such as hail or snow - not 'good' or 'pleasant' weather.Flash floodA flood that occurs within a few hours (usually less than six) of heavy or excessive rainfall, dam or levee failure or water released from an ice jam.\t\tFloodA condition that occurs when water overflows the natural or artificial confines of a stream or river; the water also may accumulate by drainage over low-lying areas.\t\tFlood crestThe highest stage or flow occurring in a flood.\t\tFlurryA flurry or snow shower is a snowfall that suddenly stops and starts and changes rapidly in intensity; the accumulation and extent of the snow are limited.FogWater that has condensed close to ground level, producing a cloud of very small droplets that reduces visibility to less than one km (three thousand and three hundred feet). In Canada, fog is defined as a cloud at ground level, and occurs when air is cooled to its dew point and below, or when atmospheric moisture increases through evaporation from water that is warmer than the air. In the United Kingdom, fog is described to occur when visibility less than one kilometer. In Australia, it is defined as a dense mass of small water droplets or particles in the lower atmosphere.FogbowA rainbow that has a white band that appears in fog, and is fringed with red on the outside and blue on the inside. \t\tForecastA forecast provides a description of the most significant weather conditions expected during the current and following days. The exact content depends upon the intended user, such as the Public or Marine forecast audiences. \t\tFreezeOccurs when the surface air temperature is expected to be 32 degrees Fahrenheit or below over a widespread area for a significant period of time. \t In Australia, the term \u201cfreeze\u201d is defined as the change from a liquid to a solid.FreezingThe change in a substance from a liquid to a solid state.\t\tFreezing drizzleDrizzle that falls in liquid form and then freezes upon impact with the ground or an item with a temperature of 32 degrees Fahrenheit or less, possibly producing a thin coating of ice. Even in small amounts, freezing drizzle may cause traveling problems. \t\tFreezing fogA suspension of numerous minute ice crystals in the air, or water droplets at temperatures below zero degrees Celsius, based at the Earth's surface, which reduces horizontal visibility; also called ice fog. \t\tFreezing levelThe altitude in the atmosphere where the temperature drops to 32F. \t\tFreezing rainRain that freezes on objects such as trees, cars and roads, forming a coating or glaze of ice. Temperatures at higher levels are warm enough for rain to form, but surface temperatures are below 32 degrees Fahrenheit, causing the rain to freeze on impact. In Canada, freezing rain is described to occur when the air temperature is below zero Celsius near the ground but above zero Celsius higher up.FrontThe boundary or transition zone between two different air masses. The basic frontal types are cold fronts, warm fronts and occluded fronts.FrostThe formation of thin ice crystals on the ground or other surfaces. Frost develops when the temperature of the exposed surface falls below 32 degrees Fahrenheit and water vapor is deposited as a solid.\tFrost pointWhen the temperature to which air must be cooled to in order to be saturated is below freezing.Fujita scaleSystem developed by Dr Theodore Fujita to classify tornadoes based on wind damage. Scale is from F0 for weakest to F5 for strongest tornadoes. \tFujiwhara effectThe Fujiwhara effect describes the rotation of two storms around each other.Funnel cloudA rotating, cone-shaped column of air extending downward from the base of a thunderstorm but not touching the ground. When it reaches the ground it is called a tornado.\tTopGale warningSustained wind speeds from 34 to 47 knots (39 to 54 mph). \tGlazea layer or coating of ice that is generally smooth and clear, and forms on exposed objects by the freezing of liquid raindrops.\t\tGlobal warmingA theory that increased concentrations of greenhouse gases are causing an elevation in the Earth's surface temperature.\t\tGood visibilityMore than 10 kilometers. \tGreenhouse effectThe warming of the atmosphere by the trapping of longwave radiation (heat) being radiated to space. The gases most responsible for this effect are water vapor and carbon dioxide.\t\tGround fogShallow fog (less than twenty feet deep) produced over the land by the cooling of the lower atmosphere as it comes in contact with the ground. Also known as radiation fog.\tGustA brief sudden increase in wind speed. Generally the duration is less than 20 seconds and the fluctuation greater than 10 miles per hour. In Canada, gust is defined as a sudden, brief increase in wind speed that generally lasts less than 20 seconds. In Australia, gust is defined as any sudden increase of wind of short duration, usually a few seconds.GustnadoGust front tornado. A small tornado, usually weak and short-lived, that occurs along the gust front of a thunderstorm. Often it is visible only as a debris cloud or dust whirl near the ground.TopHailPrecipitation in the form of balls or irregular lumps of ice produced by liquid precipitation, freezing and being coated by layers of ice as it is lifted and cooled in strong updrafts of thunderstorms. \tHazeFine dust or salt particles in the air that reduce visibility. In Canada, haze is defined to consist of fine particles of dust and pollution suspended in the atmosphere, and is distinguished from fog by its bluish or yellowish tinge.Heat balanceThe equilibrium existing between the radiation received and emitted by a planetary system.\t\t\tHeat indexAn index that combines air temperature and humidity to give an apparent temperature (how hot it feels).\t\t\tHeat islandA dome of elevated temperatures over an urban area caused by the heat absorbed by structures and pavement.\t\t\tHeat lightningLightning that can be seen, but is too far away for the thunder to be heard.\tHeat waveA period of abnormally hot weather lasting several days. Heavy snowDepending on the region of the USA, this generally means that four or more inches of snow has accumulated in 12 hours, or six or more inches of snow in 24 hours. \t\t\tHeavy snow warningOlder terminology replaced by winter storm warning for heavy snow. Issued when seven or more inches of snow or sleet is expected in the next 24 hours. A warning is used for winter weather conditions posing a threat to life and property. \tHeavy surfthe result of large waves breaking on or near the shore resulting from swells or produced by a distant storm.HighAn area of high pressure, usually accompanied by anticyclonic and outward wind flow. Also known as an anticyclone. In Canada, a high is described as an area of high atmospheric pressure with a closed, clockwise movement of air. High cloudCirrus, cirrostratus and cirrocumulus.\tHigh risk (of severe thunderstorm)Severe weather is expected to affect more than 10 percent of the area.High wind warningIssued when sustained winds from 40 to 73 mph are expected for at least one hour; or any wind gusts are expected to reach 58 miles per hour or more.\t\tHigh wind watchIssued when conditions are favorable for the development of high winds over all of or part of the forecast area but the occurrence is still uncertain. The criteria of a high wind watch are listed under the high wind warning and should include the area affected, the reason for the watch and the potential impact of the winds. \tHot or very warmIn summer, hot or very warm means more than seven degrees Celsius above normal.Hot spotTypically large areas of pavement, these \"hot spots\" are heated much quicker by the sun than surrounding grasses and forests. As a result, air rises upwards from the relatively hot surface of the pavement, reaches its condensation level, condenses, and forms a cloud above the \"hot spot\". HumidityThe amount of water vapor in the atmosphere. In Canada, it is described as the amount of moisture in the air.HurricaneA severe tropical cyclone with sustained winds over 74 miles per hour (64 knots). Normally applied to such storms in the Atlantic Basin and the Pacific Ocean east of the International Date Line.\tHygrometerAn instrument used to measure humidity.TopIce crystalsIce crystals are tiny sprinkles that sparkle in the sunshine like diamond dust and hang in the air. Ice fogA suspension of numerous minute ice crystals in the air, or water droplets at temperatures below zero degrees Celsius, based at the Earth's surface, which reduces horizontal visibility. Usually occurs at -20 degrees Fahrenheit and below.\t\tIce pelletsPrecipitation of transparent or translucent pellets of ice, which are round or irregular, rarely conical, and which have a diameter of 0.2 inch (five millimeters), or less. There are two main types. Hard grains of ice consisting of frozen raindrops and pellets of snow encased in a thin layer of ice.\t\tIce stormLiquid rain falling and freezing on contact with cold objects creating ice build-ups of 1/4th inch or more that can cause severe damage.\t\tIce storm warningOlder terminology replaced by winter storm warning for severe icing. Issued when 1/2 inch or more of accretion of freezing rain is expected. This may lead to dangerous walking or driving conditions and the pulling down of power lines and trees. A warning is used for winter weather conditions posing a threat to life and property.\t\tIndian summerAn unseasonably warm period near the middle of autumn, usually following a substantial period of cool weather.\t\tInflow bands (or feeder bands)Bands of low clouds, arranged parallel to the low-level winds and moving into or toward a thunderstorm.\t\tInsolationIncoming solar radiation. Solar heating; sunshine.\t\tInstabilityA state of the atmosphere in which convection takes place spontaneously, leading to cloud formation and precipitation.\t\tIntermittent rainIntermittent rain stops and starts repeatedly, although not as abruptly or as frequently as showers. Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)The region where the northeasterly and southeasterly trade winds converge, forming an often continuous band of clouds or thunderstorms near the equator.InversionAn increase in temperature with height. The reverse of the normal cooling with height in the atmosphere. Temperature inversions trap atmospheric pollutants in the lower troposphere, resulting in higher concentrations of pollutants at ground levels than would usually be experienced.IridescenceBrilliant patches of green or pink sometimes seen near the edges of high- or medium-level clouds.Isentropic liftLifting of air that is traveling along an upward-sloping isentropic surface. Situations involving isentropic lift often are characterized by widespread stratiform clouds and precipitation.TopJet streamStrong winds concentrated within a narrow band in the upper atmosphere. It normally refers to horizontal, high-altitude winds. The jet stream often \"steers\" surface features such as front and low pressure systems.TopKatabaticWind blowing down an incline, such as down a hillside; downslope wind.KatafrontA front (usually a cold front) at which the warm air descents the frontal surface.Killing frostFrost severe enough to end the growing season. This usually occurs at temperatures below 28 degrees Fahrenheit. In Canada, a killing frost is described as a frost severe enough to destroy annual plants and new growth on trees (in the spring) or to end the growing season (in the fall).KnotA measure of speed. It is one nautical mile per hour (1.15 miles per hour). A nautical mile is one minute of one degree of latitude.TopLa Ni\u00f1aA cooling of the equatorial waters in the Pacific Ocean. Land breezeA wind that blows from the land towards a body of water. Also known as an offshore breeze. It occurs when the land is cooler than the water.LateFrom sunset (winter), from two hours before sunset (summer).LeewardSituated away from the wind; downwind - opposite of windward.Left MoverA thunderstorm which moves to the left relative to the steering winds and to other nearby thunderstorms; often the northern part of a splitting storm.LiftingThe forcing of air in a vertical direction by an upslope in terrain or by the movement of a denser air mass.Lifting condensation levelThe level in the atmosphere where a lifted air parcel reaches its saturation point, and as a result, the water vapor within condenses into water droplets.LightningAny form of visible electrical discharges produced by thunderstorms.LikelyIn probability of precipitation statements, the equivalent of a 60 or 70 percent chance.\tLowAn area of low pressure, usually accompanied by cyclonic and inward wind flow. Also known as a cyclone.Low cloudStratus, stratocumulus, cumulus and cumulonimbus.Low-level jetA region of relatively strong winds in the lower part of the atmosphere.\tTopMainly cloudyMore than half cloud cover but with some breaks in the cloud. It can also be described as cloudy with some sunny periods.Mainly sunnyMainly sunny means sunny with some cloudy periods. \tMammatus (or mamma clouds)These clouds appear as hanging, rounded protuberances or pouches on the under-surface of a cloud. With thunderstorms, mammatus are seen on the underside of the anvil. These clouds do not produce tornadoes, funnels, hail, or any other type of severe weather, although they often accompany severe thunderstorms.Maritime air massAn air mass that forms over water. It is usually humid, and may be cold or warm.Maximum temperatureThe highest temperature during a specified time period.Mean temperatureThe average of a series of temperatures taken over a period of time, such as a day or a month.Medium cloudAltostratus, altocumulus and nimbostratus.MeteorologyThe study of the physics, chemistry, and dynamics of the atmosphere and the direct effects of the atmosphere upon the Earth's surface, the oceans, and life in general.MildIn winter, mild refers to four to seven degrees Celsius above normal.Minimum temperatureThe lowest temperature during a specified time period.MistConsists of microscopic water droplets suspended in the air, which produces a thin grayish veil over the landscape. It reduces visibility to a lesser extent than fog. In Australia, it is described as similar to fog, but visibility remains more than a kilometer. Moderate riskSevere thunderstorms are expected to affect between five and 10 percent of the area.Moderate visibilityFive to 10 kilometers\u2019 visibility.MonsoonA persistent seasonal wind, often responsible for seasonal precipitation regime. It is most commonly used to describe meteorological changes in southern and eastern Asia.MorningSunrise to noon or midnight to noon depending on context.Mountain breezeSystem of winds that blow downhill during the night.MuggyColloquially descriptive of warm and especially humid weather.Multivortex tornadoA tornado in which two or more condensation funnels or debris clouds are present at the same time, often rotating about a common center or about each other. Multiple-vortex tornadoes can be especially damaging.MushroomA thunderstorm with a well-defined anvil rollover, and thus having a visual appearance resembling a mushroom.TopNight, overnightSunset to sunrise.No weather data availableNo weather information available for this time slot.NormalThe long-term average value of a meteorological element for a certain area. For example, \"temperatures are normal for this time of year\" Usually averaged over 30 years.TopOffshore breezeA wind that blows from the land towards a body of water. Also known as a land breeze.Offshore forecastA marine weather forecast for the waters between 60 and 250 miles off the coast.Onshore breezeA wind that blows from a body of water towards the land. Also known as a sea breeze.OutflowAir that flows outward from a thunderstorm.Outflow windsWinds that blow down fjords and inlets from the land to the sea.OvercastSky condition when greater than 9/10ths of the sky is covered by clouds. In Canada overcast means grey and dull skies, with extensive cloud cover.OverrunningA condition that exists when a relatively warm air mass moves up and over a colder and denser air mass on the surface. The result is usually low clouds, fog and steady, light precipitation.OzoneA form of oxygen in which the molecule is made of three atoms instead of the usual two. Ozone is usually found in the stratosphere, and responsible for filtering out much of the sun's ultraviolet radiation. It is also a primary component of smog.Ozone holeA thinning of the ozone layer over Antarctica, which occurs each spring.TopPartly cloudySky condition when between 3/10ths and 7/10ths of the sky is covered. Used more frequently at night. In the United Kingdom, it is defined as less than half cloud cover.Partly sunnySimilar to partly cloudy. Used to emphasize daytime sunshine.PermafrostA soil layer below the surface of tundra regions that remains frozen permanently.Polar airA mass of very cold, very dry air that forms in polar regions.Polar frontThe semi-permanent, semi-continuous front that encircles the northern hemisphere separating air masses of tropical and polar origin.Polar Stratospheric Clouds (PSCs)High altitude clouds that form in the stratosphere above Antarctica during the Southern Hemisphere winter. Their presence seems to initiate the ozone loss experienced during the ensuing southern hemisphere spring.Polar vortexA circumpolar wind circulation which isolates the Antarctic continent during the cold Southern Hemisphere winter, heightening ozone depletion.Poor visibilityOne to five kilometers\u2019 visibility.POPProbability of Precipitation. Probability forecasts are subjective estimates of the chances of encountering measurable precipitation at some time during the forecast period.Popcorn convectionClouds, showers and thundershowers that form on a scattered basis with little or no apparent organization, usually during the afternoon in response to diurnal heating.PrecipitationLiquid or solid water that falls from the atmosphere and reaches the ground.PressureThe force exerted by the interaction of the atmosphere and gravity. Also known as atmospheric pressure.Pressure changeThe net difference between pressure readings at the beginning and ending of a specified interval of time.Pressure falling rapidlyA decrease in station pressure at a rate of 0.06 inch of mercury or more per hour which totals 0.02 inches or more.Pressure rising rapidlyAn increase in station pressure at a rate of 0.06 inch of mercury or more per hour which totals 0.02 inches or more.Pressure tendencyThe character and amount of atmospheric pressure change during a specified period of time, usually the three-hour period preceding an observation.Prevailing westerliesWinds in the middle latitudes (approximately 30 degrees to 60 degrees) that generally blow from west to east.Prevailing windThe direction from which the wind blows most frequently in any location.Pulse stormA thunderstorm within which a brief period (pulse) of strong updraft occurs, during and immediately after which the storm produces a short episode of severe weather. These storms generally are not tornado producers, but often produce large hail and/or damaging winds. See overshooting top, cyclic storm.TopQualitative forecastsForecasts that provide only a categorical value for the predicted variable. Examples of this include \u201crain/no rain\u201d and \u201ccloudy/partly cloudy\u201d.Quantitative forecastsForecasts in which the \u201camount\u201d of the forecast variable is specified. Quantitative precipitation forecast (QPF)A forecast of rainfall, snowfall or liquid equivalent of snowfall.Quasi-biennial oscillation (QBO)Periodic variation in the direction, either easterly or westerly, of tropical lower stratospheric winds. The direction changes every 26 months.Quasi-nonhydrostatic (QNH) Pilots, air traffic control (ATC) and low frequency weather beacons use this pressure setting to refer to the barometric altimeter setting that causes the altimeter to read altitude above mean sea level within a certain defined region. Quasi-stationary front A front which is nearly stationary or moves very little since the last synoptic position. Also known as a stationary front.TopRadarAn instrument used to detect precipitation by measuring the strength of the electromagnetic signal reflected back. (RADAR= Radio Detection and Ranging).RadiationEnergy emitted in the form of electromagnetic waves. Radiation has differing characteristics depending upon the wavelength. Radiation from the Sun has a short wavelength (ultra-violet) while energy re-radiated from the Earth's surface and the atmosphere has a long wavelength (infra-red).Radiation fogFog produced over the land by the cooling of the lower atmosphere as it comes in contact with the ground. Also known as ground fog.RainLiquid water droplets that fall from the atmosphere, having diameters greater than drizzle (0.5 mm). In Canada the term \"rain\", used alone, means liquid precipitation of significant duration and extent.Rain gaugeAn instrument used to measure rainfall amounts.Rain showersRain showers stop and start suddenly and vary widely in intensity, and are gone in less than an hour.RainbowOptical phenomena when light is refracted and reflected by moisture in the air into concentric arcs of color. Raindrops act like prisms, breaking the light into the colors of a rainbow, with red on the outer, and blue on the inner edge.Relative humidityThe amount of water vapor in the air, compared to the amount the air could hold if it was totally saturated. It is expressed as a percentage.Return flowSouth winds on the back (west) side of an eastward-moving surface high pressure system. Return flow over the central and eastern United States typically results in a return of moist air from the Gulf of Mexico (or the Atlantic Ocean).RidgeAn elongated area of high pressure in the atmosphere. Opposite of a trough.River flood warningIssued when main stem rivers are expected to reach a level above flood stage.Roll cloudA relatively rare, low-level horizontal, tube-shaped accessory cloud completely detached from the cumulonimbus base. When present, it is located along the gust front and most frequently observed on the leading edge of a line of thunderstorms. The roll cloud will appear to be slowly \"rolling\" about its horizontal axis. Roll clouds are not and do not produce tornadoes.TopSandstormParticles of sand carried aloft by a strong wind. The sand particles are mostly confined to the lowest ten feet, and rarely rise more than fifty feet above the ground.SaturationA condition of the atmosphere in which a certain volume of air holds the maximum water vapor it can hold at a specific temperature.ScatteredA cloud layer that covers between 3/8ths and 1/2 of the sky.Scud cloudsSmall, ragged, low cloud fragments that are unattached to a larger cloud base and often seen with and behind cold fronts and thunderstorm gust fronts. Such clouds generally are associated with cool moist air, such as thunderstorm outflow.Sea breezeA wind that blows from a sea or ocean towards a land mass. Also known as an onshore breeze. It occurs when the land is warmer than the water.Sea-level pressureThe pressure value obtained by the theoretical reduction or increase of barometric pressure to sea-level.Secondary cold frontA front that follows a primary cold front and ushers in even colder air.Severe thunderstormA strong thunderstorm with wind gusts in excess of 58 mph (50 knots) and/or hail with a diameter of 3/4 inch or more.Shallow fogFog in which the visibility at 6 feet above ground level is 5/8ths of a mile or more.Shelf-cloudA low-level horizontal accessory cloud that appears to be wedge-shaped as it approaches. It is usually attached to the thunderstorm base and forms along the gust front.Short-fuse warningA warning issued by the National Weather Service for a local weather hazard of relatively short duration. Short-fuse warnings include tornado warnings, severe thunderstorm warnings, and flash flood warnings. Tornado and severe thunderstorm warnings typically are issued for periods of an hour or less, flash flood warnings typically for three hours or less.ShowerPrecipitation that is intermittent, both in time, space or intensity.Sky conditionThe state of the sky in terms of such parameters as sky cover, layers and associated heights, ceiling, and cloud types.SleetRain drops that freeze into ice pellets before reaching the ground. Sleet usually bounces when hitting a surface and does not stick to objects. Forms when snow enters a warm layer of air above the surface and melts and then enters a deep layer of sub freezing air near the surface and refreezes. In Australia, sleet refers to a mixture of rain and snow or falling snow that is melting into rain.Slight chanceIn probability of precipitation statements, usually equivalent to a 20 percent chance.Slight risk (of severe thunderstorms)Severe thunderstorms are expected to affect between two and five percent of the area. A slight risk generally implies that severe weather events are expected to be isolated.SmogPollution formed by the interaction of pollutants and sunlight (photochemical smog), usually restricting visibility, and occasionally hazardous to health.SmokeA suspension in the air of small particles produced by combustion. A transition to haze may occur when smoke particles have traveled great distances (25 to 100 statute miles or more) and when the larger particles have settled out and the remaining particles have become widely scattered through the atmosphere.\tSnowFrozen precipitation composed of ice particles in complex hexagonal patterns. Snow forms in cold clouds by the direct transfer of water vapor to ice.Snow burstVery intense shower of snow, often of short duration, that greatly restricts visibility and produces periods of rapid snow accumulation.Snow flurriesLight snow showers, usually of an intermittent nature and short duration with no measurable accumulation.Snow grainsLight snow showers, usually of an intermittent nature and short duration with no measurable accumulation. In Canada, Snow grains are described as minute, white and opaque grains of ice. When they hit hard ground, they do not bounce or shatter. They usually fall in very small quantities, and never in the form of a shower.Snow pelletsPrecipitation of white, opaque grains of ice. The grains are round or sometimes conical. Diameters range from about 0.08 to 0.2 inch (2 to 5 mm). In Canada, snow pellets are brittle and easily crushed; when they fall on hard ground, they bounce and often break up. They always occur in showers and are often accompanied by snowflakes or rain drops, when the surface temperature is around zero degrees Celsius.Snow showerSnow falling at varying intensities for brief periods of time. Some accumulation is possible.Snow squallsIntense, but of limited duration, periods of moderate to heavy snowfall, accompanied by strong, gusty surface winds and possible lightning. In Canada, it is described that a snow squall brings strong winds, flurries and poor visibility.SnowfallThe depth of new snow that has accumulated since the previous day or since the previous observation.SnowflakeWhite ice crystals that have combined in a complex branched hexagonal form.Special marine warningIssued for brief or sudden occurrence of sustained wind or frequent gusts of 34 knots or more. This is usually associated with severe thunderstorms or waterspouts.SprayAn ensemble of water droplets torn by the wind from an extensive body of water, generally from the crests of waves, and carried up into the air in such quantities that it reduces the horizontal visibility.SquallA strong wind characterized by a sudden onset in which the wind speed increases at least 16 knots and is sustained at 22 knots or more for at least one minute. In Canada, a squall is defined as a strong, sudden wind which generally lasts a few minutes then quickly decreases in speed. In Australia, it is described as a sudden increase of the mean wind speed which lasts for several minutes at least before the mean wind returns to near its previous value.StabilityAn indication of how easily a parcel of air is lifted. If the air is very stable it is difficult to make the parcel rise. If the air is very unstable the parcel may rise on its own once started.Stable airAir with little or no tendency to rise, usually accompanied by clear dry weather.Steam fogFog that is formed when water vapor is added to air which is much colder than the vapor's source. This is most common when very cold air drifts across relatively warm water.Steering winds (steering currents)A prevailing synoptic scale flow which governs the movement of smaller features embedded within it. StormIn marine usage, winds 48 knots (55 miles per hour) or greater.Storm surgeA rise of the sea level alone the shore that builds up as a storm (usually a hurricane) moves over water. It is a result of the winds of the storm and low atmospheric pressures.Storm warningA marine wind warning for sustained winds greater of 48 knots (55 miles per hour) or more from a non-tropical system.Straight line windsThunderstorm winds most often found with the gust front.Subtropical stormA low pressure system that develops in subtropical waters (north of 20 north degrees latitude) and initially has non-tropical features (see table below for a list of tropical features) but does have some element of a tropical cyclone's cloud structure (located close to the center rather than away from the center of circulation).SunnySunny or a few clouds means that less than half the sky has clouds.SupercellA severe thunderstorm whose updrafts and downdrafts are in near balance allowing the storm to maintain itself for several hours. Supercells often produce large hail and tornadoes.SupersaturationThe condition which occurs in the atmosphere when the relative humidity is greater than 100 percent.TopTemperatureA measure of the warmth or coldness of an object or substance with reference to a standard value.ThunderThe sound caused by a lightning stroke as it heats the air and causes it to rapidly expand.ThunderstormA storm with lightning and thunder produced by a Cumulonimbus cloud, usually producing gusty winds, heavy rain and sometimes hail. In Australia, they are described to be usually short-lived and hit on only a small area.\tTilted storm or tilted updraftA thunderstorm or cloud tower which is not purely vertical but instead exhibits a slanted or tilted character. It is a sign of vertical wind shear, a favorable condition for severe storm development.TodayUntil sunset. TomorrowMidnight to midnight.TonightSunset to midnight.TornadoA violent rotating column of air, in contact with the ground, pendant from a cumulonimbus cloud. A tornado does not require the visible presence of a funnel cloud. It has a typical width of tens to hundreds of meters and a lifespan of minutes to hours.Trade windsPersistent tropical winds that blow from the subtropical high pressure centers towards the equatorial low. They blow northeasterly in the northern hemisphere. \tTropical stormAn organized low pressure system in the tropics with wind speeds between 38 and 74 miles per hour. In Australia, it is a term used in the northern hemisphere for a tropical cyclone.Tropical storm warningA warning issued when sustained winds of 39 to 73 miles per hour (34 to 63 knots) are expected within 24 hours. TroughA warning issued when sustained winds of 39 to 73 mph (34 to 63 knots) are expected within 24 hours. In Canada, it is described as an elongated area of relatively low pressure extending from the centre of a region of low pressure. TroughA warning issued when sustained winds of 39 to 73 mph (34 to 63 knots) are expected within 24 hours. In Canada, it is described as an elongated area of relatively low pressure extending from the centre of a region of low pressure. TurbulenceA warning issued when sustained winds of 39 to 73 miles per hour (34 to 63 knots) are expected within 24 hours.TwisterA colloquial term for a tornado.TyphoonA hurricane that forms in the Western Pacific Ocean. It is a term used in Australia for a tropical cyclone in the northwestern Pacific with maximum winds above 117 kilometers per hour (63 knots).TopUnstable airAir that rises easily and can form clouds and rain.TopVery coolVery cool, in the summer, refers to more than seven degrees Celsius below normal.Very mildIn the winter, very mild means more than seven degrees Celsius above normal.TopWarmIn summer, warm refers to four to seven degrees Celsius above normal.Warm frontA narrow transitions zone separating advancing warmer air from retreating cooler air. The air behind a warm front is warmer and typically more humid than the air it is replacing.\t In Canada, it is defined as the trailing edge of a retreating cold air mass and moves in such a way that the warmer air replaces the colder air.WaveIn meteorology any pattern identifiable on a weather map that has a cyclic pattern or a small cyclonic circulation in the early stages of development that moves along a cold front. In Canada, A wave, in meteorology, is the intersection of warm and cold fronts.WeatherState of the atmosphere with respect to heat or cold, wetness or dryness, calm or storm, clearness or cloudiness. Also, weather is the meteorological day-to-day variations of the atmosphere and their effects on life and human activity. It includes temperature, pressure, humidity, clouds, wind, precipitation and fog.WindWind is the horizontal movement of air relative to the earth's surface and is caused by variations in temperature and pressure (for instance, air rises as it warms and a cool breeze moves in to take the place of the rising air.) Wind is also known as moving air.Wind chillThe additional cooling effect resulting from wind blowing on bare skin. The wind chill is based on the rate of heat loss from exposed skin caused by the combined effects of wind and cold. The (equivalent) wind chill temperature is the temperature the body \"feels\" for a certain combination of wind and air temperature.Winter stormA heavy snow event. A snow accumulation of more than six inches in 12 hours or more than 12 inches in 24 hours.Winter storm warningIssued when seven or more inches of snow or sleet is expected in the next 24 hours, or 1/2 inch or more of accretion of freezing rain is expected. A warning is used for winter weather conditions posing a threat to life and property.TopX-rayAn electromagnetic wave of very short wavelength, able to pass through many materials opaque to light.XenonAn inert gaseous chemical element, present in trace amounts in the air and used in some kinds of electric light.TopYellow windA strong, cold, dry west wind of eastern Asia that blows across the plains during winter and carries a yellow dust from the desert.YougA hot wind during unsettled summer weather in the Mediterranean.TopZonal flow A small amplitude pattern where winds blow mostly west-to-east.Zonal windWind blowing east-to-west or west-to-east.Zulu time The mean solar time for the meridian at Greenwich, England, used as a basis for calculating time in communications, military, aviation, maritime and other activities that cross time zones. Zulu time, which is also known as Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), is used internally among people working in the field of weather and meteorology, as well as among weather enthusiasts, for weather reports and forecasts. Sources: The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) National Weather Service, the Met Office in the United Kingdom, Canada\u2019s Weather Office, and the Australian Government Bureau of Meteorology.Topics:World Weather\u00a0Advertising You might also like When Is the Equinox?The Vernal (Spring) Equinox in the Northern Hemisphere is the Autumnal (Fall) Equinox in the Southern Hemisphere. moreiOS App: Time & Date Calculator Counting the days? Let our Time & Date Calculator App for iOS do the math for you. moreTry the Night Sky Map!Find and track planets in the sky with our new Interactive Night Sky Map. Point your mobile at the sky to follow an object, or play around with the timeline. more Worm Moon in MarchThe Full Moon in March is the Worm Moon. It is also called Lenten Moon, Crow Moon, Crust Moon, Chaste Moon, Sugar Moon, and Sap Moon. more Copyright \u00a9 Time and Date AS 1995\u20132019. All rights reserved. Feedback | About Us | Advertising | Disclaimer | Privacy | Sitemap", "Urban Dictionary: driftingBrowseABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ#newVoteStoreCartTop definitiondriftingunknownHow to aim one&apos;s car at a wall and miss it completely; drifting is the opposite of grip driving, which involves taking a corner without sliding. This can be done without any regard to horsepower, weight, or any other factors. Essentially this means any car can drift, however, some cars are more apt to powerslide than drift. Drifting originated in Japan, thus most cars used to drift are Japanese. Most of the cars used to drift are also usually RWD cars with FR layouts, as they are easier to drift than AWD cars, FWD cars, or RWD cars with MR layouts. However, other drivetrains are used for drifting by different people, as driving styles vary from person to person. Some common cars used to drift are the Nissan Silvia, the Nissan 350Z, the Mazda RX-7, and the Toyota Supra.Drifting is not for the faint of heart, the poor, or those who are nursing, pregnant, or may become pregnant. If you have trouble experiencing any epic, you may not wish to try to drifting, as it will have a sudden spike in epic if done correctly.#drift#powerslide#cars#japan#rwdby stiffshifter September 14, 200933593 Get a drifting mug for your cat Abdul.2driftingunknownTo cause a vehicle to exceed its tire&apos;s limits of adhesion, exhibiting a lateral slip, resulting in an oversteer condition.Takumi was seen on Interstate 81, in his 1986 Toyota Corolla ,drifting along the many curves in the road.by Srinath May 02, 2004328141 Get a drifting mug for your mate Manafort.3DriftingunknownWhen you are high enough to the point where you don&apos;t speak and your actions are subconsciously done to get you through the high.\"Hey, Zack hasn&apos;t said a thing all night\" \"Yeah, he&apos;s probably just drifting\"#moving#high#uncontrolled#dirfting#drift#fading#stonedby HoneyCombperk June 02, 20133812 Get a Drifting mug for your cousin Rihanna.buy the domain for your pet vlogdrifting.spacedrifting.clubdrifting.fundrifting.life 4driftingunknownDrifting, the art of controling an out of control vehicle.Drifting is not a race at all but rather a subjective sport where drivers compete against each other but are judged on the basis of style and execution--think of it as the &apos;figure skating&apos; of motorsports, a controlled ballet of lightweight vehicles sliding around a turn to make the most stylized and complex drift possible. As it is not a race, drivers are not timed but are judged using a point system based on form, and the high scorer of each heat advances to the next round. To create his (or her) own style, each driver customizes their vehicle with aftermarket parts that shape their personal style and performance. Only certain models are chosen for competitive drifting; though almost any car can be caused to drift momentarily due to a loss of control, the necessity of being able to control the drift requires that only rear-wheel drive and some all wheel drive vehicles be used. Typically, drift drivers use inexpensive and lightweight Japanese vehicles such as the Nissan 240SX and its Japanese counterpart, the Silvia, but American cars have been used in competition recently as well.#drifter#drift\u00b7ed#drift\u00b7ing#drifts#driftyby Mr Drift September 03, 200612751 Get a drifting mug for your brother Manafort.5driftingunknownA really entertaining way to ruin your tires.Some dude just went drifting by me in a cloud of smoke and hit a wall, man!#crashing#missing walls#tokyo#drift king#funby XomegaX October 06, 200910649 Get a drifting mug for your mother-in-law Yasemin.6driftingunknownSomething homeless people do from town to town.Did you see that homless guy drifting last night?#drift#240sx#racing#stupid#motorsport#wannabeby BMWguru November 19, 20106631 Get a drifting mug for your papa G\u00fcnter.7driftingunknownMaking the car slip laterally by means of oversteering. Possible with a RWD vehicle. Some people try this with FWD cars as well by driving in Reverse. Its aptly defined as \"Controlling your car when it is in uncontrolable zone\"US competed in the Drifting Grand Prix with a Pontiac GTO and were knocked out before the round of 15.by LedVTECin August 20, 200413977 Get a drifting mug for your guy Callisto.Categories\ud83d\udeac Drugs\ud83d\ude4f Religion\u26bd\ufe0f Sports\ud83c\udf93 College\ud83c\udfa7 Music\ud83c\udf46 Sex\ud83c\udf70 Food\ud83d\ude4b\ud83c\udffd Name\ud83d\udcac Internet\ud83d\udcc8 Work123Next \u203aLast \u00bb\u00a9 1999-2019 Urban Dictionary \u00aeadvertise\u00a0terms of serviceprivacy\u00a0dmca\u00a0removehelpActivityAlphabetical listdriftbeerdrift bitchdrift cardrift charmdrift compatibledrift drivedrifteddrifted ondrifterdrifter (Noun)Drifter&apos;s stitchdriftgirldrift handleDriftillerationdriftindriftingDrifting in someones wakedrifting napdrifting on a memorydrifting prettydrifting sack of shitdrifting turddrift kingdrift landsDriftless Pony Clubdrift lorddrift lubeDrift Lumberdrift machine!DriftMasta\u00a9 1999-2019 Urban Dictionary \u00aeadvertise\u00a0terms of serviceprivacy\u00a0dmca\u00a0removehelp", "Genetic drift - Wikipedia Genetic drift From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search The change in the frequency of an existing gene variant in a population Not to be confused with Genetic draft, Antigenic drift, or Antigenic shift. Part of a series onEvolutionary biologyClockwise from top: Huxley - Man's Place in Nature, Darwin's finches by Gould, Homology in vertebrates Key topics Introduction to evolution Evidence of evolution Common descent Evidence of common descent Processes and outcomes Population genetics Variation Diversity Mutation Natural selection Adaptation Polymorphism Genetic drift Gene flow Speciation Adaptive radiation Co-operation Coevolution Coextinction Divergence Convergence Parallel evolution Extinction Natural history Origin of life History of life Timeline of evolution Human evolution Phylogeny Biodiversity Biogeography Classification Evolutionary taxonomy Cladistics Transitional fossil Extinction event History of evolutionary theory Overview Renaissance Before Darwin Darwin Origin of Species Before synthesis Modern synthesis Molecular evolution Evo-devo Current research History of speciation History of paleontology (timeline) Fields and applications Applications of evolution Biosocial criminology Ecological genetics Evolutionary aesthetics Evolutionary anthropology Evolutionary computation Evolutionary ecology Evolutionary economics Evolutionary epistemology Evolutionary ethics Evolutionary game theory Evolutionary linguistics Evolutionary medicine Evolutionary neuroscience Evolutionary physiology Evolutionary psychology Experimental evolution Phylogenetics Paleontology Selective breeding Speciation experiments Sociobiology Systematics Universal Darwinism Social implications Evolution as fact and theory Social effects Creation\u2013evolution controversy Objections to evolution Level of support Evolutionary biology portal Category Book Related topicsvte Genetic drift (also known as allelic drift or the Sewall Wright effect)[1] is the change in the frequency of an existing gene variant (allele) in a population due to random sampling of organisms.[2] The alleles in the offspring are a sample of those in the parents, and chance has a role in determining whether a given individual survives and reproduces. A population's allele frequency is the fraction of the copies of one gene that share a particular form.[3] Genetic drift may cause gene variants to disappear completely and thereby reduce genetic variation.[4] It can also cause initially rare alleles to become much more frequent and even fixed. When there are few copies of an allele, the effect of genetic drift is larger, and when there are many copies the effect is smaller. In the early 20th century, vigorous debates occurred over the relative importance of natural selection versus neutral processes, including genetic drift. Ronald Fisher, who explained natural selection using Mendelian genetics,[5] held the view that genetic drift plays at the most a minor role in evolution, and this remained the dominant view for several decades. In 1968, population geneticist Motoo Kimura rekindled the debate with his neutral theory of molecular evolution, which claims that most instances where a genetic change spreads across a population (although not necessarily changes in phenotypes) are caused by genetic drift acting on neutral mutations.[6][7] Contents 1 Analogy with marbles in a jar 2 Probability and allele frequency 3 Mathematical models 3.1 Wright\u2013Fisher model 3.2 Moran model 3.3 Other models of drift 3.4 Random effects other than sampling error 4 Drift and fixation 4.1 Rate of allele frequency change due to drift 4.2 Time to fixation or loss 4.3 Time to loss with both drift and mutation 5 Versus natural selection 6 Population bottleneck 6.1 Founder effect 7 History 8 See also 9 Notes and references 10 Bibliography 11 External links Analogy with marbles in a jar[edit] The process of genetic drift can be illustrated using 20 marbles in a jar to represent 20 organisms in a population.[8] Consider this jar of marbles as the starting population. Half of the marbles in the jar are red and half are blue, with each colour corresponding to a different allele of one gene in the population. In each new generation the organisms reproduce at random. To represent this reproduction, randomly select a marble from the original jar and deposit a new marble with the same colour into a new jar. This is the \"offspring\" of the original marble, meaning that the original marble remains in its jar. Repeat this process until there are 20 new marbles in the second jar. The second jar will now contain 20 \"offspring\", or marbles of various colours. Unless the second jar contains exactly 10 red marbles and 10 blue marbles, a random shift has occurred in the allele frequencies. If this process is repeated a number of times, the numbers of red and blue marbles picked each generation will fluctuate. Sometimes a jar will have more red marbles than its \"parent\" jar and sometimes more blue. This fluctuation is analogous to genetic drift\u00a0\u2013 a change in the population's allele frequency resulting from a random variation in the distribution of alleles from one generation to the next. It is even possible that in any one generation no marbles of a particular colour are chosen, meaning they have no offspring. In this example, if no red marbles are selected, the jar representing the new generation contains only blue offspring. If this happens, the red allele has been lost permanently in the population, while the remaining blue allele has become fixed: all future generations are entirely blue. In small populations, fixation can occur in just a few generations. In this simulation each black dot on a marble signifies that it has been chosen for copying (reproduction) one time. There is fixation in the blue \"allele\" within five generations. Probability and allele frequency[edit] The mechanisms of genetic drift can be illustrated with a simplified example. Consider a very large colony of bacteria isolated in a drop of solution. The bacteria are genetically identical except for a single gene with two alleles labeled A and B. A and B are neutral alleles meaning that they do not affect the bacteria's ability to survive and reproduce; all bacteria in this colony are equally likely to survive and reproduce. Suppose that half the bacteria have allele A and the other half have allele B. Thus A and B each have allele frequency 1/2. The drop of solution then shrinks until it has only enough food to sustain four bacteria. All other bacteria die without reproducing. Among the four who survive, there are sixteen possible combinations for the A and B alleles: (A-A-A-A), (B-A-A-A), (A-B-A-A), (B-B-A-A), (A-A-B-A), (B-A-B-A), (A-B-B-A), (B-B-B-A), (A-A-A-B), (B-A-A-B), (A-B-A-B), (B-B-A-B), (A-A-B-B), (B-A-B-B), (A-B-B-B), (B-B-B-B). Since all bacteria in the original solution are equally likely to survive when the solution shrinks, the four survivors are a random sample from the original colony. The probability that each of the four survivors has a given allele is 1/2, and so the probability that any particular allele combination occurs when the solution shrinks is 1 2 \u22c5 1 2 \u22c5 1 2 \u22c5 1 2 = 1 16 . {\\displaystyle {\\frac {1}{2}}\\cdot {\\frac {1}{2}}\\cdot {\\frac {1}{2}}\\cdot {\\frac {1}{2}}={\\frac {1}{16}}.} (The original population size is so large that the sampling effectively happens without replacement). In other words, each of the sixteen possible allele combinations is equally likely to occur, with probability 1/16. Counting the combinations with the same number of A and B, we get the following table. A B Combinations Probability 4 0 1 1/16 3 1 4 4/16 2 2 6 6/16 1 3 4 4/16 0 4 1 1/16 As shown in the table, the total number of combinations that have the same number of A alleles as of B alleles is six, and the probability of this combination is 6/16. The total number of other combinations is ten, so the probability of unequal number of A and B alleles is 10/16. Thus, although the original colony began with an equal number of A and B alleles, it is very possible that the number of alleles in the remaining population of four members will not be equal. Equal numbers is actually less likely than unequal numbers. In the latter case, genetic drift has occurred because the population's allele frequencies have changed due to random sampling. In this example the population contracted to just four random survivors, a phenomenon known as population bottleneck. The probabilities for the number of copies of allele A (or B) that survive (given in the last column of the above table) can be calculated directly from the binomial distribution where the \"success\" probability (probability of a given allele being present) is 1/2 (i.e., the probability that there are k copies of A (or B) alleles in the combination) is given by ( n k ) ( 1 2 ) k ( 1 \u2212 1 2 ) n \u2212 k = ( n k ) ( 1 2 ) n {\\displaystyle {n \\choose k}\\left({\\frac {1}{2}}\\right)^{k}\\left(1-{\\frac {1}{2}}\\right)^{n-k}={n \\choose k}\\left({\\frac {1}{2}}\\right)^{n}\\!} where n=4 is the number of surviving bacteria. Mathematical models[edit] Mathematical models of genetic drift can be designed using either branching processes or a diffusion equation describing changes in allele frequency in an idealised population.[9] Wright\u2013Fisher model[edit] Consider a gene with two alleles, A or B. In diploid populations consisting of N individuals there are 2N copies of each gene. An individual can have two copies of the same allele or two different alleles. We can call the frequency of one allele p and the frequency of the other q. The Wright\u2013Fisher model (named after Sewall Wright and Ronald Fisher) assumes that generations do not overlap (for example, annual plants have exactly one generation per year) and that each copy of the gene found in the new generation is drawn independently at random from all copies of the gene in the old generation. The formula to calculate the probability of obtaining k copies of an allele that had frequency p in the last generation is then[10][11] ( 2 N ) ! k ! ( 2 N \u2212 k ) ! p k q 2 N \u2212 k {\\displaystyle {\\frac {(2N)!}{k!(2N-k)!}}p^{k}q^{2N-k}} where the symbol \"!\" signifies the factorial function. This expression can also be formulated using the binomial coefficient, ( 2 N k ) p k q 2 N \u2212 k {\\displaystyle {2N \\choose k}p^{k}q^{2N-k}} Moran model[edit] The Moran model assumes overlapping generations. At each time step, one individual is chosen to reproduce and one individual is chosen to die. So in each timestep, the number of copies of a given allele can go up by one, go down by one, or can stay the same. This means that the transition matrix is tridiagonal, which means that mathematical solutions are easier for the Moran model than for the Wright\u2013Fisher model. On the other hand, computer simulations are usually easier to perform using the Wright\u2013Fisher model, because fewer time steps need to be calculated. In the Moran model, it takes N timesteps to get through one generation, where N is the effective population size. In the Wright\u2013Fisher model, it takes just one.[12] In practice, the Moran and Wright\u2013Fisher models give qualitatively similar results, but genetic drift runs twice as fast in the Moran model. Other models of drift[edit] If the variance in the number of offspring is much greater than that given by the binomial distribution assumed by the Wright\u2013Fisher model, then given the same overall speed of genetic drift (the variance effective population size), genetic drift is a less powerful force compared to selection.[13] Even for the same variance, if higher moments of the offspring number distribution exceed those of the binomial distribution then again the force of genetic drift is substantially weakened.[14] Random effects other than sampling error[edit] Random changes in allele frequencies can also be caused by effects other than sampling error, for example random changes in selection pressure.[15] One important alternative source of stochasticity, perhaps more important than genetic drift, is genetic draft.[16] Genetic draft is the effect on a locus by selection on linked loci. The mathematical properties of genetic draft are different from those of genetic drift.[17] The direction of the random change in allele frequency is autocorrelated across generations.[2] Drift and fixation[edit] The Hardy\u2013Weinberg principle states that within sufficiently large populations, the allele frequencies remain constant from one generation to the next unless the equilibrium is disturbed by migration, genetic mutations, or selection.[18] However, in finite populations, no new alleles are gained from the random sampling of alleles passed to the next generation, but the sampling can cause an existing allele to disappear. Because random sampling can remove, but not replace, an allele, and because random declines or increases in allele frequency influence expected allele distributions for the next generation, genetic drift drives a population towards genetic uniformity over time. When an allele reaches a frequency of 1 (100%) it is said to be \"fixed\" in the population and when an allele reaches a frequency of 0 (0%) it is lost. Smaller populations achieve fixation faster, whereas in the limit of an infinite population, fixation is not achieved. Once an allele becomes fixed, genetic drift comes to a halt, and the allele frequency cannot change unless a new allele is introduced in the population via mutation or gene flow. Thus even while genetic drift is a random, directionless process, it acts to eliminate genetic variation over time.[19] Rate of allele frequency change due to drift[edit] Ten simulations of random genetic drift of a single given allele with an initial frequency distribution 0.5 measured over the course of 50 generations, repeated in three reproductively synchronous populations of different sizes. In these simulations, alleles drift to loss or fixation (frequency of 0.0 or 1.0) only in the smallest population. Assuming genetic drift is the only evolutionary force acting on an allele, after t generations in many replicated populations, starting with allele frequencies of p and q, the variance in allele frequency across those populations is V t \u2248 p q ( 1 \u2212 exp \u2061 ( \u2212 t 2 N e ) ) {\\displaystyle V_{t}\\approx pq\\left(1-\\exp \\left(-{\\frac {t}{2N_{e}}}\\right)\\right)} [20] Time to fixation or loss[edit] Assuming genetic drift is the only evolutionary force acting on an allele, at any given time the probability that an allele will eventually become fixed in the population is simply its frequency in the population at that time.[21] For example, if the frequency p for allele A is 75% and the frequency q for allele B is 25%, then given unlimited time the probability A will ultimately become fixed in the population is 75% and the probability that B will become fixed is 25%. The expected number of generations for fixation to occur is proportional to the population size, such that fixation is predicted to occur much more rapidly in smaller populations.[22] Normally the effective population size, which is smaller than the total population, is used to determine these probabilities. The effective population (Ne) takes into account factors such as the level of inbreeding, the stage of the lifecycle in which the population is the smallest, and the fact that some neutral genes are genetically linked to others that are under selection.[13] The effective population size may not be the same for every gene in the same population.[23] One forward-looking formula used for approximating the expected time before a neutral allele becomes fixed through genetic drift, according to the Wright\u2013Fisher model, is T \u00af fixed = \u2212 4 N e ( 1 \u2212 p ) ln \u2061 ( 1 \u2212 p ) p {\\displaystyle {\\bar {T}}_{\\text{fixed}}={\\frac {-4N_{e}(1-p)\\ln(1-p)}{p}}} where T is the number of generations, Ne is the effective population size, and p is the initial frequency for the given allele. The result is the number of generations expected to pass before fixation occurs for a given allele in a population with given size (Ne) and allele frequency (p).[24] The expected time for the neutral allele to be lost through genetic drift can be calculated as[10] T \u00af lost = \u2212 4 N e p 1 \u2212 p ln \u2061 p . {\\displaystyle {\\bar {T}}_{\\text{lost}}={\\frac {-4N_{e}p}{1-p}}\\ln p.} When a mutation appears only once in a population large enough for the initial frequency to be negligible, the formulas can be simplified to[25] T \u00af fixed = 4 N e {\\displaystyle {\\bar {T}}_{\\text{fixed}}=4N_{e}} for average number of generations expected before fixation of a neutral mutation, and T \u00af lost = 2 ( N e N ) ln \u2061 ( 2 N ) {\\displaystyle {\\bar {T}}_{\\text{lost}}=2\\left({\\frac {N_{e}}{N}}\\right)\\ln(2N)} for the average number of generations expected before the loss of a neutral mutation.[26] Time to loss with both drift and mutation[edit] The formulae above apply to an allele that is already present in a population, and which is subject to neither mutation nor natural selection. If an allele is lost by mutation much more often than it is gained by mutation, then mutation, as well as drift, may influence the time to loss. If the allele prone to mutational loss begins as fixed in the population, and is lost by mutation at rate m per replication, then the expected time in generations until its loss in a haploid population is given by T \u00af lost \u2248 { 1 m , if m N e \u226a 1 ln \u2061 ( m N e ) + \u03b3 m if m N e \u226b 1 {\\displaystyle {\\bar {T}}_{\\text{lost}}\\approx {\\begin{cases}{\\dfrac {1}{m}},{\\text{ if }}mN_{e}\\ll 1\\\\[8pt]{\\dfrac {\\ln {(mN_{e})}+\\gamma }{m}}{\\text{ if }}mN_{e}\\gg 1\\end{cases}}} where \u03b3 {\\displaystyle \\gamma } is Euler's constant.[27] The first approximation represents the waiting time until the first mutant destined for loss, with loss then occurring relatively rapidly by genetic drift, taking time Ne\u00a0\u226a\u00a01/m. The second approximation represents the time needed for deterministic loss by mutation accumulation. In both cases, the time to fixation is dominated by mutation via the term 1/m, and is less affected by the effective population size. Versus natural selection[edit] In natural populations, genetic drift and natural selection do not act in isolation; both forces are always at play, together with mutation and migration. Neutral evolution is the product of both mutation and drift, not of drift alone. Similarly, even when selection overwhelms genetic drift, it can only act on variation that mutation provides. While natural selection has a direction, guiding evolution towards heritable adaptations to the current environment, genetic drift has no direction and is guided only by the mathematics of chance.[28] As a result, drift acts upon the genotypic frequencies within a population without regard to their phenotypic effects. In contrast, selection favors the spread of alleles whose phenotypic effects increase survival and/or reproduction of their carriers, lowers the frequencies of alleles that cause unfavorable traits, and ignores those that are neutral.[29] The law of large numbers predicts that when the absolute number of copies of the allele is small (e.g., in small populations), the magnitude of drift on allele frequencies per generation is larger. The magnitude of drift is large enough to overwhelm selection at any allele frequency when the selection coefficient is less than 1 divided by the effective population size. Non-adaptive evolution resulting from the product of mutation and genetic drift is therefore considered to be a consequential mechanism of evolutionary change primarily within small, isolated populations.[30] The mathematics of genetic drift depend on the effective population size, but it is not clear how this is related to the actual number of individuals in a population.[16] Genetic linkage to other genes that are under selection can reduce the effective population size experienced by a neutral allele. With a higher recombination rate, linkage decreases and with it this local effect on effective population size.[31][32] This effect is visible in molecular data as a correlation between local recombination rate and genetic diversity,[33] and negative correlation between gene density and diversity at noncoding DNA regions.[34] Stochasticity associated with linkage to other genes that are under selection is not the same as sampling error, and is sometimes known as genetic draft in order to distinguish it from genetic drift.[16] When the allele frequency is very small, drift can also overpower selection even in large populations. For example, while disadvantageous mutations are usually eliminated quickly in large populations, new advantageous mutations are almost as vulnerable to loss through genetic drift as are neutral mutations. Not until the allele frequency for the advantageous mutation reaches a certain threshold will genetic drift have no effect.[29] Population bottleneck[edit] Main article: Population bottleneck Changes in a population's allele frequency following a population bottleneck: the rapid and radical decline in population size has reduced the population's genetic variation. A population bottleneck is when a population contracts to a significantly smaller size over a short period of time due to some random environmental event. In a true population bottleneck, the odds for survival of any member of the population are purely random, and are not improved by any particular inherent genetic advantage. The bottleneck can result in radical changes in allele frequencies, completely independent of selection.[35] The impact of a population bottleneck can be sustained, even when the bottleneck is caused by a one-time event such as a natural catastrophe. An interesting example of a bottleneck causing unusual genetic distribution is the relatively high proportion of individuals with total rod cell color blindness (achromatopsia) on Pingelap atoll in Micronesia. After a bottleneck, inbreeding increases. This increases the damage done by recessive deleterious mutations, in a process known as inbreeding depression. The worst of these mutations are selected against, leading to the loss of other alleles that are genetically linked to them, in a process of background selection.[2] For recessive harmful mutations, this selection can be enhanced as a consequence of the bottleneck, due to genetic purging. This leads to a further loss of genetic diversity. In addition, a sustained reduction in population size increases the likelihood of further allele fluctuations from drift in generations to come. A population's genetic variation can be greatly reduced by a bottleneck, and even beneficial adaptations may be permanently eliminated.[36] The loss of variation leaves the surviving population vulnerable to any new selection pressures such as disease, climate change or shift in the available food source, because adapting in response to environmental changes requires sufficient genetic variation in the population for natural selection to take place.[37][38] There have been many known cases of population bottleneck in the recent past. Prior to the arrival of Europeans, North American prairies were habitat for millions of greater prairie chickens. In Illinois alone, their numbers plummeted from about 100 million birds in 1900 to about 50 birds in the 1990s. The declines in population resulted from hunting and habitat destruction, but a consequence has been a loss of most of the species' genetic diversity. DNA analysis comparing birds from the mid century to birds in the 1990s documents a steep decline in the genetic variation in just the latter few decades. Currently the greater prairie chicken is experiencing low reproductive success.[39] However, the genetic loss caused by bottleneck and genetic drift can increase fitness, as in Ehrlichia.[40] Over-hunting also caused a severe population bottleneck in the northern elephant seal in the 19th century. Their resulting decline in genetic variation can be deduced by comparing it to that of the southern elephant seal, which were not so aggressively hunted.[41] Founder effect[edit] Main article: Founder effect When very few members of a population migrate to form a separate new population, the founder effect occurs. For a period after the foundation, the small population experiences intensive drift. In the figure this results in fixation of the red allele. The founder effect is a special case of a population bottleneck, occurring when a small group in a population splinters off from the original population and forms a new one. The random sample of alleles in the just formed new colony is expected to grossly misrepresent the original population in at least some respects.[42] It is even possible that the number of alleles for some genes in the original population is larger than the number of gene copies in the founders, making complete representation impossible. When a newly formed colony is small, its founders can strongly affect the population's genetic make-up far into the future. A well-documented example is found in the Amish migration to Pennsylvania in 1744. Two members of the new colony shared the recessive allele for Ellis\u2013van Creveld syndrome. Members of the colony and their descendants tend to be religious isolates and remain relatively insular. As a result of many generations of inbreeding, Ellis-van Creveld syndrome is now much more prevalent among the Amish than in the general population.[29][43] The difference in gene frequencies between the original population and colony may also trigger the two groups to diverge significantly over the course of many generations. As the difference, or genetic distance, increases, the two separated populations may become distinct, both genetically and phenetically, although not only genetic drift but also natural selection, gene flow, and mutation contribute to this divergence. This potential for relatively rapid changes in the colony's gene frequency led most scientists to consider the founder effect (and by extension, genetic drift) a significant driving force in the evolution of new species. Sewall Wright was the first to attach this significance to random drift and small, newly isolated populations with his shifting balance theory of speciation.[44] Following after Wright, Ernst Mayr created many persuasive models to show that the decline in genetic variation and small population size following the founder effect were critically important for new species to develop.[45] However, there is much less support for this view today since the hypothesis has been tested repeatedly through experimental research and the results have been equivocal at best.[46] History[edit] Further information: Modern synthesis (20th century) The concept of genetic drift was introduced by a founder of population genetics, Sewall Wright. His first use of the term \"drift\" was in 1929,[47] though at the time he was using it in the sense of a directed process of change, or natural selection. Random drift by means of sampling error came to be known as the \"Sewall\u2013Wright effect,\" though he was never entirely comfortable to see his name given to it. Wright referred to all changes in allele frequency as either \"steady drift\" (e.g., selection) or \"random drift\" (e.g., sampling error).[48] \"Drift\" came to be adopted as a technical term in the stochastic sense exclusively.[49] Today it is usually defined still more narrowly, in terms of sampling error,[50] although this narrow definition is not universal.[51][52] Wright wrote that the \"restriction of \"random drift\" or even \"drift\" to only one component, the effects of accidents of sampling, tends to lead to confusion.\"[48] Sewall Wright considered the process of random genetic drift by means of sampling error equivalent to that by means of inbreeding, but later work has shown them to be distinct.[53] In the early days of the modern evolutionary synthesis, scientists were beginning to blend the new science of population genetics with Charles Darwin's theory of natural selection. Within this framework, Wright focused on the effects of inbreeding on small relatively isolated populations. He introduced the concept of an adaptive landscape in which phenomena such as cross breeding and genetic drift in small populations could push them away from adaptive peaks, which in turn allow natural selection to push them towards new adaptive peaks.[54] Wright thought smaller populations were more suited for natural selection because \"inbreeding was sufficiently intense to create new interaction systems through random drift but not intense enough to cause random nonadaptive fixation of genes.\"[55] Wright's views on the role of genetic drift in the evolutionary scheme were controversial almost from the very beginning. One of the most vociferous and influential critics was colleague Ronald Fisher. Fisher conceded genetic drift played some role in evolution, but an insignificant one. Fisher has been accused of misunderstanding Wright's views because in his criticisms Fisher seemed to argue Wright had rejected selection almost entirely. To Fisher, viewing the process of evolution as a long, steady, adaptive progression was the only way to explain the ever-increasing complexity from simpler forms. But the debates have continued between the \"gradualists\" and those who lean more toward the Wright model of evolution where selection and drift together play an important role.[56] In 1968, Motoo Kimura rekindled the debate with his neutral theory of molecular evolution, which claims that most of the genetic changes are caused by genetic drift acting on neutral mutations.[6][7] The role of genetic drift by means of sampling error in evolution has been criticized by John H. Gillespie[57] and William B. Provine, who argue that selection on linked sites is a more important stochastic force. See also[edit] Peripatric speciation Antigenic drift Coalescent theory Gene pool Meiotic drive Notes and references[edit] ^ Gould SJ (2002). \"Chapter 7, section \"Synthesis as Hardening\"\". The Structure of Evolutionary Theory. ^ a b c Masel J (October 2011). \"Genetic drift\". Current Biology. Cell Press. 21 (20): R837\u20138. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2011.08.007. PMID\u00a022032182. ^ Futuyma 1998, Glossary ^ Star B, Spencer HG (May 2013). \"Effects of genetic drift and gene flow on the selective maintenance of genetic variation\". Genetics. 194 (1): 235\u201344. doi:10.1534/genetics.113.149781. PMC\u00a03632471. PMID\u00a023457235. ^ Miller 2000, p.\u00a054 ^ a b Kimura M (February 1968). \"Evolutionary rate at the molecular level\". Nature. Nature Publishing Group. 217 (5129): 624\u20136. Bibcode:1968Natur.217..624K. doi:10.1038/217624a0. PMID\u00a05637732. ^ a b Futuyma 1998, p.\u00a0320 ^ \"Sampling Error and Evolution\". Understanding Evolution. University of California, Berkeley. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 1 December 2015. ^ Wahl LM (August 2011). \"Fixation when N and s vary: classic approaches give elegant new results\". Genetics. Genetics Society of America. 188 (4): 783\u20135. doi:10.1534/genetics.111.131748. PMC\u00a03176088. PMID\u00a021828279. ^ a b Hartl & Clark 2007, p.\u00a0112 ^ Tian 2008, p.\u00a011 ^ Moran PA (1958). \"Random processes in genetics\". Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society. 54 (1): 60\u201371. Bibcode:1958PCPS...54...60M. doi:10.1017/S0305004100033193. ^ a b Charlesworth B (March 2009). \"Fundamental concepts in genetics: effective population size and patterns of molecular evolution and variation\". Nature Reviews. Genetics. Nature Publishing Group. 10 (3): 195\u2013205. doi:10.1038/nrg2526. PMID\u00a019204717. ^ Der R, Epstein CL, Plotkin JB (September 2011). \"Generalized population models and the nature of genetic drift\". Theoretical Population Biology. Elsevier. 80 (2): 80\u201399. doi:10.1016/j.tpb.2011.06.004. PMID\u00a021718713. ^ Li & Graur 1991, p.\u00a028 ^ a b c Gillespie JH (November 2001). \"Is the population size of a species relevant to its evolution?\". Evolution; International Journal of Organic Evolution. John Wiley & Sons for the Society for the Study of Evolution. 55 (11): 2161\u20139. doi:10.1111/j.0014-3820.2001.tb00732.x. PMID\u00a011794777. ^ Neher RA, Shraiman BI (August 2011). \"Genetic draft and quasi-neutrality in large facultatively sexual populations\". Genetics. Genetics Society of America. 188 (4): 975\u201396. arXiv:1108.1635. doi:10.1534/genetics.111.128876. PMC\u00a03176096. PMID\u00a021625002. ^ Ewens 2004 ^ Li & Graur 1991, p.\u00a029 ^ Barton et al. 2007, p.\u00a0417 ^ Futuyma 1998, p.\u00a0300 ^ Otto SP, Whitlock MC (June 1997). \"The probability of fixation in populations of changing size\" (PDF). Genetics. Genetics Society of America. 146 (2): 723\u201333. PMC\u00a01208011. PMID\u00a09178020. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 March 2015. ^ Cutter AD, Choi JY (August 2010). \"Natural selection shapes nucleotide polymorphism across the genome of the nematode Caenorhabditis briggsae\". Genome Research. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press. 20 (8): 1103\u201311. doi:10.1101/gr.104331.109. PMC\u00a02909573. PMID\u00a020508143. ^ Hedrick 2005, p.\u00a0315 ^ Li & Graur 1991, p.\u00a033 ^ Kimura & Ohta 1971 ^ Masel J, King OD, Maughan H (January 2007). \"The loss of adaptive plasticity during long periods of environmental stasis\". The American Naturalist. University of Chicago Press on behalf of the American Society of Naturalists. 169 (1): 38\u201346. doi:10.1086/510212. PMC\u00a01766558. PMID\u00a017206583. ^ \"Natural Selection: How Evolution Works\". Actionbioscience. Washington, D.C.: American Institute of Biological Sciences. Archived from the original on 6 January 2010. Retrieved 24 November 2009. An interview with Douglas J. Futuyma. See answer to question: Is natural selection the only mechanism of evolution? ^ a b c Cavalli-Sforza, Menozzi & Piazza 1996 ^ Zimmer 2001 ^ Golding 1994, p.\u00a046 ^ Charlesworth B, Morgan MT, Charlesworth D (August 1993). \"The effect of deleterious mutations on neutral molecular variation\" (PDF). Genetics. Genetics Society of America. 134 (4): 1289\u2013303. PMC\u00a01205596. PMID\u00a08375663. ^ Presgraves DC (September 2005). \"Recombination enhances protein adaptation in Drosophila melanogaster\". Current Biology. Cell Press. 15 (18): 1651\u20136. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2005.07.065. PMID\u00a016169487. ^ Nordborg M, Hu TT, Ishino Y, Jhaveri J, Toomajian C, Zheng H, Bakker E, Calabrese P, Gladstone J, Goyal R, Jakobsson M, Kim S, Morozov Y, Padhukasahasram B, Plagnol V, Rosenberg NA, Shah C, Wall JD, Wang J, Zhao K, Kalbfleisch T, Schulz V, Kreitman M, Bergelson J (July 2005). \"The pattern of polymorphism in Arabidopsis thaliana\". PLoS Biology. Public Library of Science. 3 (7): e196. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0030196. PMC\u00a01135296. PMID\u00a015907155. ^ Robinson R, ed. (2003). \"Population Bottleneck\". Genetics. 3. New York: Macmillan Reference USA. ISBN\u00a00-02-865609-1. LCCN\u00a02002003560. OCLC\u00a0614996575. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 14 December 2015. ^ Futuyma 1998, pp.\u00a0303\u2013304 ^ O'Corry-Crowe G (March 2008). \"Climate change and the molecular ecology of Arctic marine mammals\". Ecological Applications. Ecological Society of America. 18 (2 Suppl): S56\u201376. doi:10.1890/06-0795.1. PMID\u00a018494363. ^ Cornuet JM, Luikart G (December 1996). \"Description and power analysis of two tests for detecting recent population bottlenecks from allele frequency data\". Genetics. Genetics Society of America. 144 (4): 2001\u201314. PMC\u00a01207747. PMID\u00a08978083. ^ Sadava et al. 2008, chpts. 1, 21\u201333, 52\u201357 ^ Dale C, Moran NA (August 2006). \"Molecular interactions between bacterial symbionts and their hosts\". Cell. 126 (3): 453\u201365. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2006.07.014. PMID\u00a016901780. ^ \"Bottlenecks and founder effects\". Understanding Evolution. University of California, Berkeley. Archived from the original on 4 December 2015. Retrieved 14 December 2015. ^ Campbell 1996, p.\u00a0423 ^ \"Genetic Drift and the Founder Effect\". Evolution Library (Web resource). Evolution. Boston, MA: WGBH Educational Foundation; Clear Blue Sky Productions, Inc. 2001. OCLC\u00a048165595. Archived from the original on 14 March 2009. Retrieved 7 April 2009. ^ Wolf, Brodie & Wade 2000 ^ Hey, Fitch & Ayala 2005 ^ Howard & Berlocher 1998 ^ Wright S (November\u2013December 1929). \"The evolution of dominance\". The American Naturalist. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press on behalf of the American Society of Naturalists. 63 (689): 556\u2013561. doi:10.1086/280290. ISSN\u00a00003-0147. JSTOR\u00a02456825. ^ a b Wright S (1955). \"Classification of the factors of evolution\". Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press. 20: 16\u201324. doi:10.1101/SQB.1955.020.01.004. ISSN\u00a00091-7451. Symposium: \"Population Genetics: The Nature and Causes of Genetic Variability in Populations\". ^ Stevenson 1991 ^ Freeman & Herron 2007 ^ Masel J (August 2012). \"Rethinking Hardy-Weinberg and genetic drift in undergraduate biology\". BioEssays. John Wiley & Sons. 34 (8): 701\u201310. doi:10.1002/bies.201100178. PMID\u00a022576789. ^ Lynch 2007 ^ Crow JF (March 2010). \"Wright and Fisher on inbreeding and random drift\". Genetics. Genetics Society of America. 184 (3): 609\u201311. doi:10.1534/genetics.109.110023. PMC\u00a02845331. PMID\u00a020332416. ^ Larson 2004, pp.\u00a0221\u2013243 ^ Stevenson 1991: Quote attributed to William B. Provine in The Origins of Theoretical Population Genetics (1971), p. 162; Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ^ Avers 1989 ^ Gillespie JH (June 2000). \"Genetic drift in an infinite population. The pseudohitchhiking model\". Genetics. Genetics Society of America. 155 (2): 909\u201319. PMC\u00a01461093. PMID\u00a010835409. Bibliography[edit] Avers CJ (1989). Process and Pattern in Evolution. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN\u00a00-19-505275-7. LCCN\u00a088005368. OCLC\u00a017677554. Barton NH, Briggs DE, Eisen JA, Goldstein DB, Patel NH (2007). Evolution. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press. ISBN\u00a0978-0-87969-684-9. LCCN\u00a02007010767. OCLC\u00a086090399. Campbell NA (1996). Biology. Benjamin/Cummings Series in the Life Sciences (4th ed.). Menlo Park, CA: Benjamin/Cummings Pub. Co. ISBN\u00a00-8053-1940-9. LCCN\u00a095045572. OCLC\u00a033333455. Cavalli-Sforza LL, Menozzi P, Piazza A (1996). The History and Geography of Human Genes (Abridged paperback ed.). Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. ISBN\u00a00-691-02905-9. OCLC\u00a035527063. Ewens WJ (2004). Mathematical Population Genetics I. Theoretical Introduction. Interdisciplinary Applied Mathematics. 27 (2nd ed.). New York: Springer-Verlag. ISBN\u00a00-387-20191-2. LCCN\u00a02003065728. OCLC\u00a053231891. Freeman S, Herron JC (2007). Evolutionary Analysis (4th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall. ISBN\u00a0978-0-13-227584-2. LCCN\u00a02006034384. OCLC\u00a073502978. Futuyma D (1998). Evolutionary Biology (3rd ed.). Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates. ISBN\u00a00-87893-189-9. LCCN\u00a097037947. OCLC\u00a037560100. Golding B, ed. (1994). Non-Neutral Evolution: Theories and Molecular Data. New York: Chapman & Hall. ISBN\u00a00-412-05391-8. LCCN\u00a093047006. OCLC\u00a029638235. \"Papers from a workshop sponsored by the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research.\" Hartl DL, Clark AG (2007). Principles of Population Genetics (4th ed.). Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates. ISBN\u00a0978-0-87893-308-2. LCCN\u00a02006036153. OCLC\u00a075087956. Hedrick PW (2005). Genetics of Populations (3rd ed.). Boston, MA: Jones and Bartlett Publishers. ISBN\u00a00-7637-4772-6. LCCN\u00a02004056666. OCLC\u00a056194719. Hey J, Fitch WM, Ayala FJ, eds. (2005). Systematics and the Origin of Species: On Ernst Mayr's 100th Anniversary. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press. ISBN\u00a0978-0-309-09536-5. LCCN\u00a02005017917. OCLC\u00a070745851. Howard DJ, Berlocher SH, eds. (1998). Endless Forms: Species and Speciation. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN\u00a0978-0-19-510901-6. LCCN\u00a097031461. OCLC\u00a037545522. Kimura M, Ohta T (1971). Theoretical Aspects of Population Genetics. Monographs in Population Biology. 4. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN\u00a00-691-08096-8. LCCN\u00a075155963. OCLC\u00a0299867647. Larson EJ (2004). Evolution: The Remarkable History of a Scientific Theory. Modern Library Chronicles. 17. New York: Modern Library. ISBN\u00a00-679-64288-9. LCCN\u00a02003064888. OCLC\u00a053483597. Li W, Graur D (1991). Fundamentals of Molecular Evolution. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates. ISBN\u00a00-87893-452-9. LCCN\u00a090043581. OCLC\u00a022113526. Lynch M (2007). The Origins of Genome Architecture. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates. ISBN\u00a0978-0-87893-484-3. LCCN\u00a02007000012. OCLC\u00a077574049. Miller G (2000). The Mating Mind: How Sexual Choice Shaped the Evolution of Human Nature. New York: Doubleday. ISBN\u00a00-385-49516-1. LCCN\u00a000022673. OCLC\u00a043648482. Sadava D, Heller HC, Orians GH, Purves WK, Hillis DM (2008). Life: The Science of Biology. II: Evolution, Diversity and Ecology (8th ed.). Sunderland, MA; Gordonsville, VA: Sinauer Associates; W. H. Freeman and Company. ISBN\u00a0978-0-7167-7674-1. LCCN\u00a02006031320. OCLC\u00a071632224. Stevenson JC (1991). Dictionary of Concepts in Physical Anthropology. Reference Sources for the Social Sciences and Humanities. 10. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. ISBN\u00a00-313-24756-0. LCCN\u00a090022815. OCLC\u00a022732327. Tian JP (2008). Evolution Algebras and their Applications. Lecture Notes in Mathematics. 1921. Berlin; New York: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-74284-5. ISBN\u00a0978-3-540-74283-8. LCCN\u00a02007933498. OCLC\u00a0173807298. Zbl\u00a01136.17001. Wolf JB, Brodie ED, Wade MJ, eds. (2000). Epistasis and the Evolutionary Process. Oxford, UK; New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN\u00a00-19-512806-0. LCCN\u00a099046515. OCLC\u00a042603105. Zimmer C (2001). Evolution: The Triumph of an Idea. Introduction by Stephen Jay Gould; foreword by Richard Hutton (1st ed.). New York: HarperCollins. ISBN\u00a00-06-019906-7. LCCN\u00a02001024077. OCLC\u00a046359440. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Genetic drift. Sheehy, Bob. \"Population genetics simulation program\". Radford, VA: Radford University. Retrieved 2015-12-21. Grimes, Bill. \"Genetic Drift Simulation\". Tucson, Arizona: The University of Arizona. Retrieved 2016-08-25. vteEvolutionary biology Evolutionary history of life Index of evolutionary biology articles Introduction Outline of evolution Timeline of evolution Evolution Abiogenesis Adaptation Adaptive radiation Cladistics Coevolution Common descent Convergence Divergence Earliest known life forms Evidence of evolution Extinction Event Gene-centered view Homology Last universal common ancestor Macroevolution Microevolution Origin of life Panspermia Parallel evolution Speciation Taxonomy Population genetics Biodiversity Gene flow Genetic drift Mutation Natural selection Variation Development Canalisation Evolutionary developmental biology Inversion Modularity Phenotypic plasticity Of taxa Birds origin Brachiopods Molluscs Cephalopods Dinosaurs Fish Fungi Insects butterflies Life Mammals cats canids wolves dogs hyenas dolphins and whales horses primates humans lemurs sea cows Plants Reptiles Spiders Tetrapods Viruses influenza Of organs Cell DNA Flagella Eukaryotes symbiogenesis chromosome endomembrane system mitochondria nucleus plastids In animals eye hair auditory ossicle nervous system brain Of processes Aging Death Programmed cell death Avian flight Biological complexity Cooperation Color vision in primates Emotion Empathy Ethics Eusociality Immune system Metabolism Monogamy Morality Mosaic evolution Multicellularity Sexual reproduction Gamete differentiation/sexes Life cycles/nuclear phases Mating types Meiosis Sex-determination Snake venom Tempo and modes Gradualism/Punctuated equilibrium/Saltationism Micromutation/Macromutation Uniformitarianism/Catastrophism Speciation Allopatric Anagenesis Catagenesis Cladogenesis Cospeciation Ecological Hybrid Parapatric Peripatric Reinforcement Sympatric History Renaissance and Enlightenment Transmutation of species Charles Darwin On the Origin of Species History of paleontology Transitional fossil Blending inheritance Mendelian inheritance The eclipse of Darwinism Modern synthesis History of molecular evolution Extended evolutionary synthesis Philosophy Darwinism Alternatives Catastrophism Lamarckism Orthogenesis Mutationism Saltationism Structuralism Spandrel Theistic Vitalism Teleology in biology Related Biogeography Ecological genetics Molecular evolution Phylogenetics Tree Polymorphism Protocell Systematics Category Portal vtePopulation geneticsKey concepts Hardy-Weinberg law Genetic linkage Identity by descent Linkage disequilibrium Fisher's fundamental theorem Neutral theory Shifting balance theory Price equation Coefficient of inbreeding and relationship Fitness Heritability Selection Natural Sexual Artificial Ecological Effects of selectionon genomic variation Genetic hitchhiking Background selection Genetic drift Small population size Population bottleneck Founder effect Coalescence Balding\u2013Nichols model Founders R. A. Fisher J. B. S. Haldane Sewall Wright Related topics Evolution Microevolution Evolutionary game theory Fitness landscape Genetic genealogy Quantitative genetics Index of evolutionary biology articles Evolutionary biology portal Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Genetic_drift&oldid=878281858\" Categories: Population geneticsEvolutionary biologyGenetic genealogyHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionUse dmy dates from January 2011Good articlesCS1: long volume valueCommons category link is on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces ArticleTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages \u0627\u0644\u0639\u0631\u0628\u064a\u0629Asturianu\u09ac\u09be\u0982\u09b2\u09be\u0411\u0430\u0448\u04a1\u043e\u0440\u0442\u0441\u0430\u0411\u044a\u043b\u0433\u0430\u0440\u0441\u043a\u0438BosanskiCatal\u00e0\u010ce\u0161tinaDanskDeutschEesti\u0395\u03bb\u03bb\u03b7\u03bd\u03b9\u03ba\u03acEspa\u00f1olEsperantoEuskara\u0641\u0627\u0631\u0633\u06ccFran\u00e7aisGalego\ud55c\uad6d\uc5b4\u0540\u0561\u0575\u0565\u0580\u0565\u0576\u0939\u093f\u0928\u094d\u0926\u0940HrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaInterlingua\u00cdslenskaItaliano\u05e2\u05d1\u05e8\u05d9\u05ea\u10e5\u10d0\u10e0\u10d7\u10e3\u10da\u10d8Krey\u00f2l ayisyen\u041a\u044b\u0440\u0433\u044b\u0437\u0447\u0430Lietuvi\u0173Magyar\u041c\u0430\u043a\u0435\u0434\u043e\u043d\u0441\u043a\u0438Bahasa MelayuNederlands\u65e5\u672c\u8a9eNorskNorsk nynorskO\u02bbzbekcha/\u045e\u0437\u0431\u0435\u043a\u0447\u0430PolskiPortugu\u00easRom\u00e2n\u0103\u0420\u0443\u0441\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439ScotsSimple EnglishSloven\u0161\u010dina\u0421\u0440\u043f\u0441\u043a\u0438 / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / \u0441\u0440\u043f\u0441\u043a\u043e\u0445\u0440\u0432\u0430\u0442\u0441\u043a\u0438SuomiSvenska\u0e44\u0e17\u0e22T\u00fcrk\u00e7e\u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0441\u044c\u043a\u0430\u5434\u8bed\u4e2d\u6587 Edit links This page was last edited on 14 January 2019, at 00:38\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "Permafrost | Definition of Permafrost by Merriam-Webster SINCE 1828 Menu JOIN MWU Gain access to thousands of additional definitions and advanced search features\u2014ad free! JOIN NOW GAMES BROWSE THESAURUS WORD OF THE DAY VIDEO MORE WORD OF THE DAY VIDEO WORDS AT PLAY FAVORITES WORDS AT PLAY FAVORITES Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram dictionary thesaurus JOIN MWU GAMES THESAURUS WORD OF THE DAY VIDEO WORDS AT PLAY FAVORITES Follow: Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram permafrost noun per\u00b7\u200bma\u00b7\u200bfrost | \\ \u02c8p\u0259r-m\u0259-\u02ccfr\u022fst \\ Definition of permafrost : a permanently frozen layer at variable depth below the surface in frigid regions of a planet (such as earth) Examples of permafrost in a Sentence Recent Examples on the Web Worse, melting permafrost contributes to global warming itself. \u2014 David Grossman, Popular Mechanics, \"Melting Permafrost Poses a Huge Danger to Artic Infrastructure,\" 11 Dec. 2018 Warmer summers have also meant that diseases, long locked in the Arctic permafrost, may thaw and spread among herds, though scientists aren\u2019t completely sure how much of an impact this is having. \u2014 Brian Resnick, Vox, \"The Arctic has lost 2.6 million reindeer over the past 20 years,\" 11 Dec. 2018 An example would be the thawing of large areas of permafrost, which could release the carbon stored in them. \u2014 John Timmer, Ars Technica, \"Researchers suggest we could tip into a hothouse Earth\u2014here\u2019s what that means,\" 10 Aug. 2018 In the Arctic and Antarctic, warming can lead to the melting of permafrost, releasing carbon dioxide that has been frozen for millennia. \u2014 Avery Thompson, Popular Mechanics, \"Scientists Warn Earth's Ecosystems Could Start Releasing CO2 On Their Own,\" 7 Aug. 2018 In addition, the decomposition of the permafrost also releases toxic gases, otherwise known as greenhouse gases, like carbon dioxide and methane, which accelerate climate change and make the planet increasingly warmer. \u2014 Elly Belle, Teen Vogue, \"Arctic Wolf Spiders Are Getting Bigger and It Could Slow Part of Climate Change,\" 24 July 2018 Melting of the permafrost was mentioned no less than four times. \u2014 Anchorage Daily News, \"Readers write: Letters to the editor, January 15, 2018,\" 15 Jan. 2018 Arctic lands are covered by areas of ground known as permafrost that have been frozen since the Pleistocene. \u2014 Paul Mann, Smithsonian, \"Can Bringing Back Mammoths Help Stop Climate Change?,\" 14 May 2018 As a warming climate thaws this permafrost, more and more of the older carbon will be broken down by microbes and released as carbon dioxide or methane, with the potential to greatly warm the planet. \u2014 Chris Mooney, Anchorage Daily News, \"Ancient carbon is coming from Arctic soil. It might be fine, but it might be terrible.,\" 1 Mar. 2018 These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'permafrost.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback. See More First Known Use of permafrost 1943, in the meaning defined above History and Etymology for permafrost permanent + frost Keep scrolling for more Learn More about permafrost Share permafrost Resources for permafrost Time Traveler! Explore the year a word first appeared Dictionary Entries near permafrost perm Perm' permaculture permafrost permalloy permanence permanency Statistics for permafrost Look-up Popularity Time Traveler for permafrost The first known use of permafrost was in 1943 See more words from the same year Keep scrolling for more More Definitions for permafrost permafrost noun English Language Learners Definition of permafrost technical : a layer of soil that is always frozen in very cold regions of the world See the full definition for permafrost in the English Language Learners Dictionary More from Merriam-Webster on permafrost Rhyming Dictionary: Words that rhyme with permafrost Britannica.com: Encyclopedia article about permafrost Comments on permafrost What made you want to look up permafrost? Please tell us where you read or heard it (including the quote, if possible). Show Comments Hide Comments WORD OF THE DAY smithereens fragments or bits Get Word of the Day daily email! Test Your Vocabulary A Green Quiz What is the best definition of green-eyed monster? corruption nauseated a voracious appetite jealousy Test your visual vocabulary with our 10-question challenge! TAKE THE QUIZ Test Your Knowledge - and learn some interesting things along the way. TAKE THE QUIZ Love words? Need even more definitions? Subscribe to America's largest dictionary and get thousands more definitions and advanced search\u2014ad free! Merriam-Webster unabridged Words at Play Can 'Exponential' Mean 'Lots'? (Or, 'How to Disappoint Your Math Teacher') Playing the 'Wild Card' It can be anything. Why Is 'Celtic' Pronounced Two Ways? \\SELT\\ is the older one 6 Words That Come from Names of Places When the name on the map gets its own meaning Ask the Editors A Look at Uncommon Onomatopoeia Some imitative words are more surprising than others When Body Parts Are Also Verbs Head, shoulders, metaphors, and toes Literally How to use a word that (literally) drives some people nuts. Is Singular 'They' a Better Choice? The awkward case of 'his or her' Word Games A Green Quiz How many questions can you answer about the word \"green\"? Take the quiz Return of Name that Color! Additional colors! More obscure than before! Take the quiz Name That Thing Test your visual vocabulary with our 10-question challenge! Take the quiz Word Winder's CrossWinder A game of winding words. Play the game Merriam Webster Learn a new word every day. Delivered to your inbox! OTHER MERRIAM-WEBSTER DICTIONARIES SPANISH CENTRAL LEARNER'S ESL DICTIONARY WORDCENTRAL FOR KIDS VISUAL DICTIONARY SCRABBLE\u00ae WORD FINDER MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S UNABRIDGED DICTIONARY BRITANNICA ENGLISH - ARABIC TRANSLATION NGLISH - SPANISH-ENGLISH TRANSLATION FOLLOW US Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Browse the Dictionary: a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z 0-9 Home Help Apps About Us Shop Advertising Info Dictionary API Contact Us Word of the Year Law Dictionary Medical Dictionary Privacy Policy Terms of Use Browse the Thesaurus Browse the Medical Dictionary Browse the Legal Dictionary Browse the Spanish-English Dictionary \u00a9 2019 Merriam-Webster, Incorporated Learn More from M-W Trending: 'Crawdad': A Novel's Title Sings Learn More from M-W Can 'Exponential' Mean 'Lots'? Learn More from M-W A Green Quiz Learn More from M-W 6 Words Derived from Place Names Learn More from M-W A Look at Uncommon Onomatopoeia", "(PDF) Challenges and solutions for long-term permafrost borehole temperature monitoring and data interpretation | Academic Article We use cookies to make interactions with our website easy and meaningful, to better understand the use of our services, and to tailor advertising. For further information, including about cookie settings, please read our Cookie Policy . By continuing to use this site, you consent to the use of cookies.Got ittopSee all \u203a8 CitationsSee all \u203a44 ReferencesSee all \u203a9 FiguresDownload citationShare Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Google+ RedditDownload full-text PDFChallenges and solutions for long-term permafrost borehole temperature monitoring and data interpretationArticle (PDF Available)\u2002in\u2002Geographica helvetica 71(2):121-131\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0June 2016\u2002with\u2002123 ReadsDOI: 10.5194/gh-71-121-2016 Cite this publication Rachel Luethi7.5Swiss National Park Marcia Phillips27.15WSL Institute for Snow and Avalanche Research SLFAbstractLong-term borehole temperature monitoring in mountain permafrost environments is challenging un- der the hostile conditions reigning in alpine environments. On the basis of data measured in the SLF borehole network we show three situations where ground temperature data should be interpreted with caution. (i) Ther- mistors have the tendency to drift, particularly if exposed to moisture or mechanical strain. This induces apparent warming or cooling, which can be difficult to differentiate from real ground temperature changes. Recalibration of thermistor chains is impossible if they cannot be extracted as a result of borehole deformation in creeping permafrost terrain. A solution using zero-curtain-based detection of drift and correction of data is presented. This method is however limited to the active layer, due to the lack of a reference temperature at greater depth. (ii) In contrast to drift-induced apparent warming, actual warming may be induced by natural processes or by the effects of construction activity. (iii) Control data from neighbouring boreholes are sometimes used to fill data gaps and discern drift \u2013 however these data may only underline the strong spatial variability of ground temperatures rather than provide measurement redundancy. A selection of recently observed problems regarding borehole monitoring in a hostile measurement environment are discussed, and advantages and possible drawbacks of various solutions including measurement redundancy or alternate instrumentation are presented.Discover the world's research15+ million members118+ million publications700k+ research projectsJoin for free Figures - uploaded by Rachel LuethiAuthor contentAll content in this area was uploaded by Rachel Luethi Map of Switzerland showing the location of the SLF permafrost monitoring boreholes (sites containing PERMOS boreholes maintained by SLF are shown in light grey). The boreholes presented in this paper have been underlined. Reproduced with the authorisation of swisstopo (K606-01).\u2026\u00a0 . Overview of the presented sites of the SLF permafrost borehole temperature monitoring network. An asterisk indicates boreholes which are part of the Swiss Permafrost Monitoring Network PERMOS.\u2026\u00a0 Schematic zero-curtain-based borehole temperature data correction.\u2026\u00a0 +5Measured and processed borehole temperature data at 2 and 3 m depth (in the active layer) at Schafberg B1.\u2026\u00a0Content uploaded by Rachel LuethiAuthor contentAll content in this area was uploaded by Rachel Luethi on Jun 09, 2016 Download full-text PDF Geogr. Helv., 71, 121\u2013131, 2016www.geogr-helv.net/71/121/2016/doi:10.5194/gh-71-121-2016\u00a9 Author(s) 2016. CC Attribution 3.0 License.supported byChallenges and solutions for long-term permafrostborehole temperature monitoring and data interpretationRachel Luethi and Marcia PhillipsWSL Institute for Snow and Avalanche Research \u2013 SLF, Fl\u00fcelastrasse 11, 7260 Davos Dorf, SwitzerlandCorrespondence to: Rachel Luethi (rachel.luethi@slf.ch)Received: 4 March 2015 \u2013 Revised: 29 April 2016 \u2013 Accepted: 2 May 2016 \u2013 Published: 9 June 2016Abstract. Long-term borehole temperature monitoring in mountain permafrost environments is challenging un-der the hostile conditions reigning in alpine environments. On the basis of data measured in the SLF boreholenetwork we show three situations where ground temperature data should be interpreted with caution. (i) Ther-mistors have the tendency to drift, particularly if exposed to moisture or mechanical strain. This induces apparentwarming or cooling, which can be dif\ufb01cult to differentiate from real ground temperature changes. Recalibrationof thermistor chains is impossible if they cannot be extracted as a result of borehole deformation in creeping per-mafrost terrain. A solution using zero-curtain-based detection of drift and correction of data is presented. Thismethod is however limited to the active layer, due to the lack of a reference temperature at greater depth. (ii) Incontrast to drift-induced apparent warming, actual warming may be induced by natural processes or by the effectsof construction activity. (iii) Control data from neighbouring boreholes are sometimes used to \ufb01ll data gaps anddiscern drift \u2013 however these data may only underline the strong spatial variability of ground temperatures ratherthan provide measurement redundancy. A selection of recently observed problems regarding borehole moni-toring in a hostile measurement environment are discussed, and advantages and possible drawbacks of varioussolutions including measurement redundancy or alternate instrumentation are presented.1 IntroductionMountain permafrost is sensitive to climate change and theresulting changes in snow cover or air temperature sinceground temperatures are often close to 0 \u25e6C (e.g. Christiansenet al., 2010; Harris et al., 2003; PERMOS, 2013; ZenklusenMutter et al., 2010). Recently increasing interest in the ther-mal state of permafrost is related to the construction of infras-tructure (Bommer et al., 2010), rock-slope instability (e.g.Fischer et al., 2012; Gruber and Haeberli, 2007; Huggel etal., 2010; Krautblatter et al., 2013), rock glacier (e.g. Aren-son et al., 2002; Kenner et al., 2014) and talus slope dynamics(e.g. Delaloye and Lambiel, 2005) and in general to naturalhazards from permafrost areas (e.g. Huggel et al., 2010; Ra-vanel and Deline, 2011; Luethi et al., 2015).The longest available mountain permafrost borehole tem-perature series worldwide is measured at Murt\u00e8l-Corvatschrock glacier in the Eastern Swiss Alps and was started in1987 (Haeberli et al., 1988). Nowadays the data are incor-porated in the Swiss Permafrost Monitoring Network PER-MOS (e.g. PERMOS, 2013). In addition to the borehole datain the large of\ufb01cial permafrost monitoring networks (mainlynational ones) like PERMOS, NORPERM (Juliussen et al.,2010) and several networks in North America (Smith et al.,2010), which are all incorporated in the Global TerrestrialNetwork for Permafrost (GTN-P; Burgess et al., 2000), thereare also a number of other boreholes in which permafrosttemperatures are monitored. In the Swiss Alps the latter areoften located close to infrastructure and can reveal informa-tion on the in\ufb02uence of construction activity and infrastruc-ture as well as on the evolution of permafrost.Most temperature measurement series in the Alps are stilltoo short to elicit trends but are extremely valuable for thedetection of thermal processes in complex terrain (ZenklusenMutter et al., 2010; Zenklusen Mutter and Phillips, 2012a).Borehole temperature data can also be used to enhance pro-cess understanding in combination with other measurementslike borehole deformation measurements (Arenson et al.,2002), borehole logging (Scapozza et al., 2015), geophysicalPublished by Copernicus Publications for the Geographisch-Ethnographische Gesellschaft Z\u00fcrich & Association Suisse de G\u00e9ographie. 122 R. Luethi and M. Phillips: Long-term permafrost borehole temperaturemethods (e.g. Hauck et al., 2011; Hilbich et al., 2009; Kraut-blatter and Hauck, 2007; Vonder M\u00fchll et al., 2000) or kine-matic monitoring with continuous automatic GPS measure-ments or sporadically with total stations, differential GPS orterrestrial laser scanning (e.g. Delaloye et al., 2008, 2010;Kenner et al., 2014; Roer et al., 2005; Scapozza et al., 2014;Wirz et al., 2014).The prerequisite for any form of borehole temperaturedata analysis is that the data are of high quality and havelong-term continuity. This is a challenging objective for in-struments located at exposed sites in high alpine terrain.One of the problems encountered over time with the use ofthermistors is sensor drift, which induces apparent temper-ature changes. Average relative root mean square drift wasfound to be 0.19 \u00b10.08 \u00b5K week\u22121(9.88 \u00d710\u22126\u00b14.16 \u00d710\u22126K year\u22121) in a study on the long-term stability of fourcommercially available glass bead thermistors (Lawton andPatterson, 2002). These authors found that positive thermis-tor drift is exacerbated by humidity \u2013 a ubiquitous problemin alpine environments. Borehole instruments can be sub-ject to mechanical strain, which can also lead to erroneousdata. Kreider et al. (2008) state that, in electronic devicesthat depend on a change of resistance, stretching of the mem-brane lengthens the resistive element, thereby increasing re-sistance. This induces an apparent decrease in the tempera-ture registered by thermistors. It is therefore essential to beable to distinguish sensor drift from real temperature modi\ufb01-cations to avoid making false conjectures on the state of thepermafrost.The aim of this paper is to discuss some of the challengespresented by long-term temperature measurements in bore-holes in mountain permafrost \u2013 both from a technical pointof view and with regard to data interpretation. Possible solu-tions are discussed. Examples from the SLF permafrost mon-itoring network are presented. Data acquisition is described,data processing is explained and selected results showingspeci\ufb01c problems and various thermal phenomena are pre-sented. Particular emphasis is given to apparent temperaturechanges caused by sensor drift and to data correction withinthe active layer.2 Data2.1 Borehole temperature measurements and dataaccessThe SLF permafrost borehole temperature monitoring net-work includes 25 boreholes at 13 sites in the Swiss Alps(Fig. 1, Table 1). Nine of these are included in the SwissPermafrost Monitoring Network (PERMOS). The others arenot because they were drilled in the context of constructionprojects and are often close to mountain infrastructure andso not ideally suited for undisturbed permafrost monitoringwith regard to climate change. The boreholes are locatedat elevations above approximately 2400 m a.s.l. and coverdifferent landforms like crests, rock walls, talus slopes androck glaciers with contrasting temperatures and ice contents.They are up to 53 m deep and the longest measurement se-ries were started in 1996. In this paper we discuss data fromthe boreholes at Eggishorn, Schafberg, Matterhorn, Gr\u00e4chenand Arolla. The sites are brie\ufb02y described in Sect. 2.2. TheSchafberg and Matterhorn boreholes are part of PERMOS.The boreholes are equipped with grouted watertight PVCtubes. The instruments are placed in watertight boxes in con-crete wells and are grounded for protection against lightning.Temperatures are measured with calibrated high-precision(\u00b10.01 \u25e6C) NTC (negative temperature coef\ufb01cient) YellowSprings Instruments (YSI) 48006/8 thermistors at variousdepths in 2-hourly to daily resolution, and data are stored inCampbell CR10X and C1000 data loggers. Power is providedby two 12 V lithium batteries. All thermistors were calibratedin the laboratory at 0 \u25e6C in ice\u2013water mixtures before beinginstalled.The SLF permafrost monitoring network has been in-cluded in the research experiment platform SwissExperi-ment (Dawes et al., 2008; Jeung et al., 2010) in 2015.Metadata were registered in the SwissExperiment meta-data wiki (http://www.swiss-experiment.ch/index.php/SLF_permafrost_borehole_data). Processed data are availableupon request on the internet (http://montblanc.slf.ch:22001/)via a GSN middleware (Aberer et al., 2006, 2007). It is trans-mitted automatically for locations where data are read out re-motely and updated periodically for all other locations. PER-MOS data are available online (http://dx.doi.org/10.13093/permos-2016-01.)2.2 Site descriptions2.2.1 EggishornThe Eggishorn borehole is located at 2840 m a.s.l., at thebase of a cable-car pylon in a steep southeast-facing screeslope. The borehole is 10.5 m deep and equipped with 15YSI 44006 thermistors. It was drilled in 2008 by the cable-car company for permafrost monitoring purposes.2.2.2 SchafbergThe Schafberg site has two neighbouring boreholes locatedon the west-facing rock glacier Foura da l\u2019Amd Ursina abovePontresina in the Upper Engadine. They were both drilledin 1990 by VAW (ETH Zurich) and later on transferred tothe SLF permafrost monitoring network in 1997 and to PER-MOS in 2000. B1 at 2754 m a.s.l. is equipped with 16 YSI44006 thermistors and B2 at 2732 ma.s.l. with 12 YSI 44006thermistors.2.2.3 Matterhorn, H\u00f6rnli RidgeThe Matterhorn borehole is located in a \ufb02at sector of the east-ern H\u00f6rnli ridge of the mountain at 3270 m a.s.l., just aboveGeogr. Helv., 71, 121\u2013131, 2016 www.geogr-helv.net/71/121/2016/ R. Luethi and M. Phillips: Long-term permafrost borehole temperature 123Table 1. Overview of the presented sites of the SLF permafrost borehole temperature monitoring network. An asterisk indicates boreholeswhich are part of the Swiss Permafrost Monitoring Network PERMOS.Site Landform Borehole(s) Coordinates Elevation(m a.s.l.)Measurement periodMont Dolin talus slope Arolla B2 46.02663\u25e6N,7.45473\u25e6E2840 16 December 1996 to28 June 2007Arolla B1 46.02677\u25e6N,7.45487\u25e6E2820 16 December 1996 to 7March 2013Eggishorn talus slope Eggishorn 46.42687\u25e6N,8.09365\u25e6E2840 since 27 February 2009Gr\u00e4chen talus slope Gr\u00e4chen Grat 46.17642\u25e6N,7.85910\u25e6E2860 since 18 August 2004Gr\u00e4chen Berg 46.18694\u25e6N,7.86922\u25e6E2450 since 18 November2002Matterhorn rock ridge H\u00f6rnli Ridge B2* 45.98231\u25e6N,7.67600\u25e6E3270 since 8 October 2005Schafberg(Ursina/VAW)rock glacier Schafberg B2* 46.49878\u25e6N,9.92522\u25e6E2732 since 4 October 1996Figure 1. Map of Switzerland showing the location of the SLF permafrost monitoring boreholes (sites containing PERMOS boreholesmaintained by SLF are shown in light grey). The boreholes presented in this paper have been underlined. Reproduced with the authorisationof swisstopo (K606-01).www.geogr-helv.net/71/121/2016/ Geogr. Helv., 71, 121\u2013131, 2016 124 R. Luethi and M. Phillips: Long-term permafrost borehole temperaturethe H\u00f6rnli mountain hut, and is part of PERMOS. The bore-hole was drilled in 2005 in an attempt to \ufb01nd water for thehut and is 53 m deep. It is equipped with 15 YSI 44006 ther-mistors.2.2.4 Gr\u00e4chenTwo 24 m deep boreholes were drilled in 2002 during theplanning phase of a chairlift. They are located adjacent to thechairlift middle station on a northwest-facing talus slope at2450 m a.s.l. Both boreholes are equipped with 12 YSI 44006thermistors.2.2.5 Arolla, Mont DolinThe two 6 m boreholes on the eastern slope of Mont Dolinabove Arolla were drilled in 1996 to monitor experimentalavalanche defence structures in creeping permafrost terrain(Phillips, 2000). They are located in a scree slope at 2840 and2820 m a.s.l. and both equipped with \ufb01ve YSI 44008 thermis-tors. Unfortunately the measurements in these two boreholesat Mont Dolin had to be stopped in 2013 due to the occur-rence of massive rockfall over both boreholes.3 Methods3.1 Data analysis and processingBorehole temperature data were carefully checked and if nec-essary corrected or removed but data gaps were not \ufb01lled. Tocarry out quality controls speci\ufb01c processing routines weredeveloped with R (R Development Core Team, 2011) andapplied to all data. For all processed values a \ufb02ag is set in thedatabase, indicating the procedure with which the value hasbeen changed or deleted.3.1.1 Data \ufb01lteringData were \ufb01ltered on the basis of prede\ufb01ned minimumand/or maximum ground temperature values. Values exceed-ing these were deleted. Filters were applied for all sensorslocated at different depths. Temperature minima and maximawere chosen according to realistic values expected for a cer-tain thermistor: if for example temperatures within the per-mafrost body remain below 0 \u25e6C during the whole measure-ment series it is not probable that single days exhibit temper-atures much above 0 \u25e6C, and therefore a maximum thresholdof a few hundredths of a degree would be chosen. For exam-ples where drift is visible higher thresholds have to be chosenin order to avoid losing data unnecessarily by data \ufb01lteringsince \ufb01ltering is applied before the zero-curtain-based datacorrection.Figure 2. Schematic zero-curtain-based borehole temperature datacorrection.3.1.2 Zero-curtain-based data correctionThe zero curtain refers to the effect maintaining temperaturesof freezing/thawing soils close to 0 \u25e6C due to latent heat re-lease during phase change (Outcalt et al., 1990). This phe-nomenon also occurs within the active layer of permafrost.The zero curtain is the only period during which ground tem-perature remains constant at 0 \u25e6C and thus allows one to eval-uate whether thermistors in the active layer are measuringcorrectly or undergoing sensor drift. A zero-curtain-basedcorrection has been developed which is explained in the fol-lowing and shown schematically in Fig. 2. For a zero-curtain-based correction, the spring or autumn zero curtains of thedifferent years are \ufb01rst detected by applying the followingcriteria: (i) temperature is within a given temperature range(e.g. > \u22120.5 and < 0.5 \u25e6C), and (ii) the temperature gradientdoes not exceed a certain predetermined value. Temperaturegradients are based on the absolute difference to the preced-ing values. Best results were obtained by calculating runningmeans of the whole time series with a window of a few days.The detected zero curtain is checked visually and can be im-proved iteratively by changing the different input parame-ters of the function. Different regressions can be applied (lin-ear, exponential and several polynomial regressions) to theevaluated zero curtain in order to detect and correct thermaldrift. Best \ufb01t seems to be obtained by second-order poly-nomial functions because drift tends to start slowly and in-crease exponentially. Drift can attain several degrees Celsiusover a period of around 5 years. Drift is only corrected forincreasing \ufb01tted values because drift of temperature sensorsrarely results in apparently decreasing temperatures (one ex-ception is discussed in Sect. 4.2). Our observations show thatin Alpine boreholes drift is most often caused by moistureincursion due to damaged borehole tubing, which leads to adecrease in thermal resistivity and thus to apparently increas-ing temperatures.Geogr. Helv., 71, 121\u2013131, 2016 www.geogr-helv.net/71/121/2016/ R. Luethi and M. Phillips: Long-term permafrost borehole temperature 125Zero-curtain-based data correction is only possible withinthe active layer where phase changes at 0 \u25e6C occur. Below,sensors have to be removed for recalibration in the laboratoryto ensure that measurements are correct. This is not alwayspossible, as thermistor chains can be trapped due to boreholedeformation and/or freezing of water at the base of the bore-hole. Observations on mechanical disturbances such as waterintrusion or strain damaging the sensors help to discriminatebetween sensor drift and natural phenomena related to warm-ing permafrost.4 Results showing selected thermal phenomenaregistered in boreholesIn the following subsections, selected processes observed inmountain permafrost and various problems and solutions re-garding measurement techniques are discussed on the ba-sis of temperature data measured in different boreholes inthe SLF permafrost monitoring network. The phenomenashown include apparent warming due to sensor drift, appar-ent cooling caused by the stretching of thermistor cables, ac-tual permafrost degradation caused by construction activityand unexpected contrasts in ground temperature over shortdistances. These examples have been chosen because theyrepresent typical challenges in the context of borehole tem-perature monitoring at present.4.1 Apparent warming induced by sensor driftApparent warming induced by sensor drift was observed inboreholes at Eggishorn and Schafberg. The application ofzero-curtain-based data correction is shown, and its in\ufb02uenceon active layer thickness (ALT) is evaluated.4.1.1 EggishornBorehole temperature measurements from early 2009 on-wards indicated that the active layer was 6m thick. In sum-mer 2011 sudden permafrost degradation occurred to thebase of the borehole (Fig. 3a), and the active layer did notfreeze back completely in winter 2011/2012. This abruptwarming to 10.5 m depth seemed suspicious, so the ther-mistor chain was recalibrated and found to be defect, as itregistered positive temperatures (several tenths of a degreeCelsius) in a 0 \u25e6C ice\u2013water mixture. Dissection of the ther-mistor chain in the laboratory revealed that water had causeddamage to the thermistors, leading to sensor drift and thus toapparently increasing ground temperatures. Lawton and Pat-terson (2002) con\ufb01rm that humidity adversely affects ther-mistor stability. The thermistor chain was replaced, as wasthe logger and special waterproo\ufb01ng measures were taken(e.g. additional heat shrink tubing) to protect the sensorsagainst renewed water in\ufb01ltration.In an attempt to reconstruct the temperature regime withinthe active layer during the period when the thermistorswere faulty, the zero-curtain-based correction explained inSect. 3.2.2 was applied. Ground temperatures were correctedfor all sensors to a depth of 5 m, i.e. within the active layerwith the parameters speci\ufb01ed in Table 2. Temperature databelow were removed after the date at which the sensorswithin the active layer exhibited temperature drift for the \ufb01rsttime. Visual inspection of the measured data clearly indicatesthat drift was also occurring below the active layer. Compar-ison of the thermal contour plot of raw temperature data withthe plot showing the processed data (Fig. 3) shows that thecorrection of ground temperatures to the order of 0.1 \u25e6C oreven less results in signi\ufb01cant changes in the interpretationof active layer duration. This is due to the fact that tempera-ture gradients in the pro\ufb01le are low and ground temperaturesare close to 0 \u25e6C. This method allowed cutting data loss toa certain extent within the active layer. Continued measure-ments with the new thermistor chain will help to understandthe processes occurring in this warm permafrost substrate.4.1.2 SchafbergBorehole 2 (located at 2754 m a.s.l.) exhibited drift from2010 onwards, so the thermistor chain was replaced in 2013.Analogous to Eggishorn (Sect. 4.1.1) zero-curtain correctionhas been applied with second-order polynomial regression inorder to reconstruct borehole temperature data prior to 2013.The values of the used parameters are speci\ufb01ed in Table 2.Processed borehole temperature data at 2 and 3 m depth areshown in Fig. 4. Using these processed data, annual maxi-mum active layer thicknesses have been calculated (Fig. 5).Even though they do not represent true temperatures and sen-sors below the active layer cannot be corrected, they give anindication on the evolution of the temperatures in the activelayer.4.2 Apparent cooling induced by stretching of thermistorcablesThe instruments in boreholes in mountain permafrost can un-dergo strong lateral deformation (e.g. due to the presenceof shear horizons) leading to thermistor loss through shear-ing (Zenklusen and Phillips, 2012b). Borehole instrumentscan also be subject to longitudinal deformation, caused byground subsidence or mechanical strain. Stretching of ther-mistor cables lengthens the resistive element, thereby in-creasing resistance (Kreider et al., 2008). This causes an ap-parent decrease in ground temperature when using NTC ther-mistors.The Matterhorn borehole data shows initial warming fol-lowed by decreasing temperatures at depths signi\ufb01cantly be-low the active layer (Fig. 6), particularly between 20 and40 m depth. This phenomenon started after snowmelt washed\ufb01ne-grained material into the borehole tubing in July 2008,making it impossible to extract the thermistors thereafter.This \u201ccementing\u201d of the tube may have induced stretchingwww.geogr-helv.net/71/121/2016/ Geogr. Helv., 71, 121\u2013131, 2016 126 R. Luethi and M. Phillips: Long-term permafrost borehole temperatureFigure 3. Contour plots of measured borehole temperature data at Eggishorn at several depths (a) and the corresponding zero-curtain-corrected ground temperatures and removed data for unveri\ufb01able values measured below the active layer (b).Table 2. Values used for the zero-curtain-based borehole temperature correction for Eggishorn and Schafberg B1.Borehole Depth (m) Temperature Temperature Window of Correctionrange (\u25e6C) gradient (\u25e6C) running mean methodEggishorn 0.5 \u22120.15\u20130.25 0.003 40 h exponential1.0 \u22120.18\u20130.15 0.0006 80 h exponential1.5 \u22120.2\u20130.3 0.0015 40 h second-order polynomial2.0 \u22120.2\u20130.3 0.0015 40 h second-order polynomial2.5 \u22120.3\u20130.1 0.0015 40 h second-order polynomial3.0 \u22120.2\u20130.3 0.0015 40 h second-order polynomial3.5 \u22120.05\u20130.5 0.0008 40 h second-order polynomial4.0 \u22120.1\u20130.2 0.0005 40 h second-order polynomial4.5 \u22120.1\u20130.5 0.0005 40 h second-order polynomial5.0 \u22120.1\u20130.045 0.0001 50 h second-order polynomialSchafberg B1 2.0 \u22120.3\u20130.25 0.005 15 days second-order polynomial3.0 \u22120.05\u20130.3 0.005 20 days second-order polynomial4.0 \u22120.3\u20130.25 0.005 15 days second-order polynomialof some thermistor cables, causing the apparent temperaturedecrease registered since 2008. Due to the lack of a referencetemperature at depth, it is not possible to correct these data.4.3 Warming induced by construction activityConstruction activity in mountain permafrost can in\ufb02uenceboth ground temperature and ice content (Bommer et al.,2010) and eventually lead to mass movements (e.g. Ravanelet al., 2013) or to creep and/or subsidence due to warmingand ice loss. These processes can affect the geometry of in-frastructure, causing damage and substantially shortening itsdesign life. As a result, specially adapted technical measuresand construction materials need to be used in substrates withnegative ground temperatures \u2013 and wherever possible, ice-rich ground should be avoided (Bommer et al., 2009). High-quality borehole temperature measurements are therefore es-sential in the planning phase of mountain infrastructure.Temperature measurements in the two boreholes nearthe intermediate station of a chairlift at 2450 m a.s.l. aboveGr\u00e4chen show the rapid degradation of permafrost since2003, following the formation of a supra-permafrost talik inplace of the active layer and massive intra-permafrost talikGeogr. Helv., 71, 121\u2013131, 2016 www.geogr-helv.net/71/121/2016/ R. Luethi and M. Phillips: Long-term permafrost borehole temperature 127Figure 4. Measured and processed borehole temperature data at 2and 3 m depth (in the active layer) at Schafberg B1.Figure 5. Maximum annual active layer thicknesses of raw and pro-cessed borehole temperature data at Schafberg B1.formation (Fig. 7). This rapid thawing can be attributed tothe construction of the chairlift midway station during theexceptionally hot summer 2003, when a large pit had to beexcavated for the foundations. The structure was speci\ufb01callydesigned for this site: it is \ufb02exible and its three-point geome-try can constantly be adapted to the changing substrate con-ditions inducing subsidence during ice loss (Phillips et al.,2006). The credibility of the borehole temperature data at thissite is underlined by the fact that the permafrost degradationwas registered in two boreholes simultaneously, underliningthe utility of redundant measurements. In addition, data mea-sured in boreholes within a radius of a few hundred metres(Ritigraben and Seetalhorn) helped to con\ufb01rm that the per-mafrost thaw described above was very local and can be at-tributed to the in\ufb02uence of the construction activity.Figure 6. Contour plot of ground temperatures in the Matterhorn,H\u00f6rnli Ridge, borehole with apparent cooling effects at depth.Measurements carried out in boreholes located close toeach other can be useful to identify technical problems suchas sensor drift or unexpected thermal anomalies, caused forexample by air or water \ufb02uxes within the ground, whichcould otherwise be interpreted as measurement errors them-selves. In contrast, they sometimes also allow one to discernthe high spatial variability of ground temperature in moun-tainous terrain over short distances.4.4 Contrasting ground temperatures over shortdistancesTemperature measurements in two 6 m boreholes on the east-ern slope of Mont Dolin above Arolla are shown in Fig. 8.Surprising contrasts in ground temperature can be observedhere over a very short distance. Permafrost is completelyabsent in borehole B1, which is only affected by seasonalfrost to varying depths (depending on the depth and dura-tion of the winter snow cover) and remains unfrozen theremainder of the year. In contrast, permafrost is present inborehole B2, which is only 30 m away but higher up onthe slope. The permafrost appears to be quite ice-rich here,as active layer thickness remained rather constant at around2.5 m depth over the measurement period between 1996 and2011, whereas active layers thickened in other talus slopes inthe Swiss Alps during this period (e.g. during the 2003 heatwave) (PERMOS, 2007). High ice contents below the activelayer typically lead to constant active layer thicknesses dueto the latent heat required to melt ice (Zenklusen Mutter andPhillips, 2012a).www.geogr-helv.net/71/121/2016/ Geogr. Helv., 71, 121\u2013131, 2016 128 R. Luethi and M. Phillips: Long-term permafrost borehole temperatureFigure 7. Contour plots of ground temperatures in two boreholes at the intermediate station of a chairlift above Gr\u00e4chen showing permafrostdegradation at depth (a) and supra-permafrost and intra-permafrost talik formation leading to permafrost degradation (b).5 DiscussionOver the years various technical challenges related to themeasurement of ground temperature in boreholes have be-come apparent and have been solved with technical solutionsand/or the post-processing of thermal data. Measurement un-certainties of high-precision thermistors are of the order of afew hundredths of a degree when thermistors are calibratedon a regular basis. However, in Alpine permafrost, recali-bration is often impossible because thermistors are blockedin the borehole tube due to borehole deformation caused bycreep and shearing of the permafrost substrate. It can there-fore be assumed that effective precision may be reduced withtime, which is a problem for long-term measurements. Notbeing able to recalibrate thermistors leads to a further chal-lenge, namely in distinguishing between actually occurringprocesses (e.g. permafrost warming) and sensor drift. In ad-dition, for logistical, technical and \ufb01nancial reasons mostborehole data are only retrieved on-site once or twice a year,which results in huge data losses in the event of technicalproblems. Drift is often not immediately detected unless it re-sults in an obvious suspicious increase in temperatures (e.g.induced by water damage to the sensors), as was registered atEggishorn \u2013 however lateral water/air \ufb02uxes at depth can leadto similar \u201csuspicious\u201d temperature data but are a naturallyoccurring phenomenon of particular interest. Observations ofsuch lateral disturbances in mountain permafrost \u2013 caused bywater (Zenklusen and Phillips, 2012b) or air \ufb02uxes (Phillipset al., 2009) \u2013 have increased recently. Less dramatic sensordrift is often only detected after several years, making it allthe more dif\ufb01cult to discriminate between sensor drift and ac-tually occurring processes. The presented zero-curtain-baseddata correction may help to reduce data loss by the detectionof sensor drift in advance and by correcting drifting temper-atures. Nevertheless every processing routine contains someuncertainties \u2013 that is, the possibility of not detecting the zerocurtain or detecting a wrong zero curtain.Long-term cooling is more suspicious under the presentclimate conditions. The coincident occurrence of mechanicaldisturbance and persistent cooling in the Matterhorn bore-hole makes it doubly suspicious, and it probably has to beattributed to stretching of thermistor cables.Despite being extremely expensive and logistically chal-lenging, measurement redundancy (i.e. the drilling of twoboreholes per site rather than one) allows one to discernnatural processes such as lateral air/water \ufb02uxes, to observeground temperature contrasts over short distances and to de-tect the occurrence of sensor drift. However the Mont Dolinexample shows that measurement redundancy can also un-expectedly reveal contrasting ground temperatures over veryshort distances, which is of interest but cancels the actualaim of carrying out \u201ccontrol\u201d measurements in adjacent bore-holes.The borehole data shown here underline the fact thatchanges can occur at unpredictable depths in the ground andthermistors have the limitation of being located at prede\ufb01neddepths. The ideal measurement technique in changing moun-tain permafrost substrates would be \ufb01bre-optic distributedtemperature sensing (DTS) since it allows one to measuretemperatures over the whole length of the borehole and thusdiscern variations at any depth. However at present, \ufb01rst tests(not shown here) using DTS in the laboratory and in ourGeogr. Helv., 71, 121\u2013131, 2016 www.geogr-helv.net/71/121/2016/ R. Luethi and M. Phillips: Long-term permafrost borehole temperature 129Figure 8. Contour plots of the ground temperatures in two boreholes at Mont Dolin, Arolla. Borehole B1 (a) is not in permafrost whereasB2 (b) is.boreholes have shown that there is too much measurementnoise and the accuracy of the system (0.2 \u25e6C) is not yet highenough to register temperature changes smaller than 0.02 \u25e6C,which is crucial for example in the detection of water dur-ing talik formation (Zenklusen and Phillips, 2012b). In ad-dition, the system has a high energy consumption and is fartoo bulky to \ufb01t into conventional concrete shafts \u2013 which areessential for protection against rockfall and avalanches.The SLF borehole temperature monitoring network hasnot only proven useful to measure the long-term evolutionof permafrost \u2013 it also delivers valuable information on natu-ral and arti\ufb01cial factors in\ufb02uencing temperature and ice con-tent in mountain permafrost. The latter can for example bederived from borehole drilling logs or cores. The data ob-tained are also essential for calibrating and validating numer-ical simulations (e.g. Haberkorn et al., 2015a, b; Magnin etal., 2015; Noetzli et al., 2010).6 ConclusionsLong-term temperature monitoring in boreholes is carriedout to detect the in\ufb02uences of the climate and of local con-ditions such as snow cover depth and duration on the ther-mal state of permafrost. However, data must be interpretedwith care, as thermistors can be subject to drift if they are ex-posed to moisture or their cables are damaged. Thermistorsshould therefore be recalibrated regularly. However, in creep-ing mountain permafrost thermistor chains are often blockedin the boreholes or frozen to the tube, preventing recalibra-tion. Using specially developed R functions we showed thatsemi-automatic zero-curtain-based drift detection and cor-rection are possible for data measured within the active layerthanks to the bi-annual occurrence of 0 \u25e6C for prolonged pe-riods, but not below, due to the lack of a reference tempera-ture. Measurement redundancy is very useful to detect mea-surement errors, natural phenomena such as lateral water/air\ufb02ow or the in\ufb02uence of infrastructure. However, redundancycan also reveal strongly contrasting ground conditions overshort distances (permafrost/no permafrost) and thus could nolonger be useful in this respect. An alternate measurementsystem using distributed temperature sensing which is notsubject to drift would be ideal to measure temperatures overthe entire length of a borehole, but the required accuracy hasnot yet been attained and the hardware is not yet suitable forhostile \ufb01eld conditions.The following phenomena or combinations of these wereobserved in selected boreholes of the SLF monitoring net-work: (i) moisture-induced sensor drift leading to apparentwarming; (ii) mechanically strained cables, causing appar-ent cooling; (iii) evidence of the in\ufb02uence of constructionactivity; and (iv) contrasting ground temperatures over shortdistances.These examples underline that great care must be taken inthe measurement design, the analysis and interpretation oflong-term borehole temperature data as well as in the main-tenance of the measurement infrastructure.www.geogr-helv.net/71/121/2016/ Geogr. Helv., 71, 121\u2013131, 2016 130 R. Luethi and M. Phillips: Long-term permafrost borehole temperature7 Data availabilityData are available from the Swiss Permafrost MonitoringNetwork Database (PERMOS Database) of the Swiss Per-mafrost Monitoring Network (PERMOS) http://dx.doi.org/10.13093/permos-2016-01.The Supplement related to this article is available onlineat doi:10.5194/gh-71-121-2016-supplement.Acknowledgements. We thank M. Hiller, the SLF electronicsgroup and mechanical workshop as well as all \ufb01eld assistants forsupport with \ufb01eld work and measurement equipment. N. Dawes andJ. Caduff-Fiddes are thanked for their support with SwissExperi-ment. We kindly acknowledge Canton Valais and Canton Grisonsas well as all borehole owners (Bergbahnen Gr\u00e4chen, Burgerge-meinde Zermatt, Luftseilbahn Fiesch-Eggishorn). Two of the SLFboreholes presented are incorporated in PERMOS. The quality ofnon-PERMOS SLF borehole temperature data was improved withinthe scope of the IQUASAP (Improving Quality and Availability ofhigh alpine Snow and Permafrost data) project funded by CCES(Competence Center Environment and Sustainability of the ETHZurich). We warmly thank the editor, Martin Hoelzle, as well asBenno Staub and an anonymous reviewer for their constructivefeedback.Edited by: M. HoelzleReviewed by: two anonymous refereesReferencesAberer, K., Hauswirth, M., and Salehi, A.: A middleware for fastand \ufb02exible sensor network deployment, Proceedings of the 32ndinternational conference on very large data bases, Seoul, Korea,1199\u20131202, 2006.Aberer, K., Hauswirth, M., and Salehi, A.: Infrastructure for DataProcessing in Large-Scale Interconnected Sensor Networks, In-ternational Conference on Mobile Data Management 2007, 198\u2013205, doi:10.1109/mdm.2007.36, 2007.Arenson, L., Hoelzle, M., and Springman, S.: Borehole deforma-tion measurements and internal structure of some rock glaciersin Switzerland, Permafrost Periglacial Process., 13, 117\u2013135,doi:10.1002/ppp.414, 2002.Bommer, C., Phillips, M., Keusen, H. R., and Teysseire, P.: Bauenim Permafrost: Ein Leitfaden f\u00fcr die Praxis, WSL-Institut f\u00fcrSchnee- und Lawinenforschung SLF, 2009.Bommer, C., Phillips, M., and Arenson, L. U.: Practical recommen-dations for planning, constructing and maintaining infrastructurein mountain permafrost, Permafrost Periglacial Process., 21, 97\u2013104, doi:10.1002/ppp.679, 2010.Burgess, M., Smith, S., Brown, J., Romanovsky, V., and Hinkel, K.:The Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost (GTNet-P): per-mafrost monitoring contributing to global climate observations,Current Research 2000-E14, 1\u20138, 2000.Christiansen, H. H., Etzelm\u00fcller, B., Isaksen, K., Juliussen, H., Far-brot, H., Humlum, O., Johansson, M., Ingeman-Nielsen, T., Kris-tensen, L., and Hjort, J.: The thermal state of permafrost in thenordic area during the international polar year 2007\u20132009, Per-mafrost Periglacial Process., 21, 156\u2013181, doi:10.1002/ppp.687,2010.Dawes, N., Kumar, K. A., Michel, S., Aberer, K., and Lehning, M.:Sensor Metadata Management and Its Application in Collabo-rative Environmental Research, Fourth IEEE International Con-ference on eScience, 143\u2013150, doi:10.1109/eScience.2008.27,2008.Delaloye, R. and Lambiel, C.: Evidences of winter ascend-ing air circulation throughout talus slopes and rock glacierssituated in the lower belt of alpine discontinuous per-mafrost (Swiss Alps), Norsk geogr. Tidsskr., 59, 194\u2013201,doi:10.1080/00291950510020673, 2005.Delaloye, R., Perruchoud, E., Avian, M., Kaufmann, V., Bodin,X., Hausmann, H., Ikeda, A., K\u00e4\u00e4b, A., Kellerer-Pirklbauer, A.,Krainer, K., Lambiel, C., Mihajlovic, D., Staub, B., Roer, I., andThibert, E.: Recent interannual variations of rock glacier creep inthe European Alps, 9th International Conference on PermafrostFairbanks, Alaska, 343\u2013348, 2008.Delaloye, R., Lambiel, C., and G\u00e4rtner-Roer, I.: Overview of rockglacier kinematics research in the Swiss Alps, Geogr. Helv., 65,135\u2013145, doi:10.5194/gh-65-135-2010, 2010.Fischer, L., Purves, R. S., Huggel, C., Noetzli, J., and Haeberli, W.:On the in\ufb02uence of topographic, geological and cryospheric fac-tors on rock avalanches and rockfalls in high-mountain areas,Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci., 12, 241\u2013254, doi:10.5194/nhess-12-241-2012, 2012.Gruber, S. and Haeberli, W.: Permafrost in steep bedrock slopes andits temperature-related destabilization following climate change,J. Geophys. Res., 112, F02S18, doi:10.1029/2006JF000547,2007.Haberkorn, A., Phillips, M., Kenner, R., Gallos, S., Rhyner, H.,Bavay, M., and Hoelzle, M.: Thermal Regime of Rock and itsRelation to Snow Cover in Steep Alpine Rock Walls: Gemsstock,Central Swiss Alps, Geogr. Ann. Ser. A-phys. Geogr., 97, 579\u2013597, doi:10.1111/geoa.12101, 2015a.Haberkorn, A., Hoelzle, M., Phillips, M., and Kenner, R.: Snowas a driving factor of rock surface temperatures in steeprough rock walls, Cold Reg. Sci. Technol., 118, 64\u201375,doi:10.1016/j.coldregions.2015.06.013, 2015b.Haeberli, W., Huder, J., Keusen, H. R., Pica, J., and R\u00f6thlisberger,H.: Core drilling through rock\u2013glacier permafrost, Tapir, Trond-heim, 937\u2013942, 1988.Harris, C., Vonder M\u00fchll, D., Isaksen, K., Haeberli, W., Sollid, J. L.,King, L., Holmlund, P., Dramis, F., Guglielmin, M., and Palacios,D.: Warming permafrost in European mountains, Glob. Planet.Chang., 39, 215\u2013225, doi:10.1016/j.gloplacha.2003.04.001,2003.Hauck, C., B\u00f6ttcher, M., and Maurer, H.: A new model for esti-mating subsurface ice content based on combined electrical andseismic data sets, The Cryosphere, 5, 453\u2013468, doi:10.5194/tc-5-453-2011, 2011.Hilbich, C., Marescot, L., Hauck, C., Loke, M. H., and M\u00e4usbacher,R.: Applicability of electrical resistivity tomography monitoringto coarse blocky and ice-rich permafrost landforms, PermafrostPeriglacial Process., 20, 269\u2013284, doi:10.1002/ppp.652, 2009.Geogr. Helv., 71, 121\u2013131, 2016 www.geogr-helv.net/71/121/2016/ R. Luethi and M. Phillips: Long-term permafrost borehole temperature 131Huggel, C., Salzmann, N., Allen, S., Caplan-Auerbach, J., Fis-cher, L., Haeberli, W., Larsen, C., Schneider, D., and Wes-sels, R.: Recent and future warm extreme events and high-mountain slope stability, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A: Mathe-matical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 368, 2435\u20132459,doi:10.1098/rsta.2010.0078, 2010.Jeung, H., Sarni, S., Paparrizos, I., Sathe, S., Aberer, K., Dawes,N., Papaioannou, T. G., and Lehning, M.: Effective MetadataManagement in Federated Sensor Networks, Newport Beach,CA, USA, 7\u20139 June 2010, 107\u2013114, doi:10.1109/SUTC.2010.29,2010.Juliussen, H., Christiansen, H. H., Strand, G. S., Iversen, S., Midt-t\u00f8mme, K., and R\u00f8nning, J. S.: NORPERM, the Norwegian Per-mafrost Database \u2013 a TSP NORWAY IPY legacy, Earth Syst. Sci.Data, 2, 235\u2013246, doi:10.5194/essd-2-235-2010, 2010.Kenner, R., B\u00fchler, Y., Delaloye, R., Ginzler, C., and Phillips, M.:Monitoring of high alpine mass movements combining laserscanning with digital airborne photogrammetry, Geomorphol-ogy, 206, 492\u2013504, doi:10.1016/j.geomorph.2013.10.020, 2014.Krautblatter, M. and Hauck, C.: Electrical resistivity tomographymonitoring of permafrost in solid rock walls, J. Geophys. Res.-Earth Surf., 112, F02S20, doi:10.1029/2006jf000546, 2007.Krautblatter, M., Funk, D., and G\u00fcnzel, F. K.: Why per-mafrost rocks become unstable: a rock\u2013ice-mechanical modelin time and space, Earth Surf. Process. Landf., 38, 876\u2013887,doi:10.1002/esp.3374, 2013.Kreider, J. F., Claridge, D. E., and Culp, C. H.: Heating, Ventilatingand Air Conditioning Control Systems, in: Energy managementand conservation handbook, edited by: Kreith, F. and Goswami,D. Y., CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, Boca Raton FL, 2008.Lawton, K. M. and Patterson, S. R.: Long-term relative stabil-ity of thermistors: Part 2, Precision Engineering, 26, 340\u2013345,doi:10.1016/S0141-6359(02)00110-1, 2002.Luethi, R., Gruber, S., and Ravanel, L.: Modelling transient groundsurface temperatures of past rockfall events: towards a betterunderstanding of failure mechanisms in changing periglacialenvironments, Geogr. Ann. Ser. A-phys. Geogr., 97, 753\u2013767,doi:10.1111/geoa.12114, 2015.Magnin, F., Deline, P., Ravanel, L., Noetzli, J., and Pogliotti, P.:Thermal characteristics of permafrost in the steep alpine rockwalls of the Aiguille du Midi (Mont Blanc Massif, 3842 m a.s.l),The Cryosphere, 9, 109\u2013121, doi:10.5194/tc-9-109-2015, 2015.N\u00f6tzli, J., Gruber, S., and von Poschinger, A.: Modellierungund Messung von Permafrosttemperaturen im Gipfelgratder Zugspitze, Deutschland, Geogr. Helv., 65, 113\u2013123,doi:10.5194/gh-65-113-2010, 2010.Outcalt, S. I., Nelson, F. E., and Hinkel, K. M.: The zero-curtain effect: Heat and mass transfer across an isothermalregion in freezing soil, Water Resour. Res., 26, 1509\u20131516,doi:10.1029/WR026i007p01509, 1990.PERMOS: Permafrost in Switzerland 2008/2009 and 2009/2010,University of Zurich, Zurich, 80 pp., 2013.Phillips, M.: In\ufb02uences of snow-supporting structures on the ther-mal regime of the ground in alpine permafrost terrain, 2000, PhDThesis, WSL Institute of Snow and Avalanche Research SLF,Davos, Switzerland, 146 pp., 2000.Phillips, M.: Avalanche defence strategies and monitoring of twosites in mountain permafrost terrain, Pontresina, Eastern SwissAlps., Nat. Hazards, 39, 353\u2013379, doi:10.1007/s11069-005-6126-x, 2006.Phillips, M., Zenklusen Mutter, E., Kern-Luetschg, M., and Lehn-ing, M.: Rapid degradation of ground ice in a ventilated talusslope: Fl\u00fcela Pass, Swiss Alps, Permafrost Periglacial Process.,20, 1\u201314, doi:10.1002/ppp.638, 2009.Ravanel, L. and Deline, P.: Climate in\ufb02uence on rockfalls in high-Alpine steep rockwalls: The north side of the Aiguilles de Cha-monix (Mont Blanc massif) since the end of the \u2018Little Ice Age\u2019,The Holocene, 21, 357\u2013365, doi:10.1177/0959683610374887,2011.Ravanel, L., Deline, P., Lambiel, C., and Vincent, C.: Instability of aHigh Alpine Rock Ridge: the Lower Ar\u00eate Des Cosmiques, MontBlanc Massif, France, Geogr. Ann. Ser. A-phys. Geogr., 95, 51\u201366, doi:10.1111/geoa.12000, 2013.R Development Core Team: R: A Language and Environment forStatistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing,Vienna, Austria, 2011.Roer, I., K\u00e4\u00e4b, A., and Dikau, R.: Rockglacier acceleration in theTurtmann valley (Swiss Alps): Probable controls, Norsk geogr.Tidsskr., 59, 157-163, doi:10.1080/00291950510020655, 2005.Scapozza, C., Lambiel, C., Bozzini, C., Mari, S., and Conedera,M.: Assessing the rock glacier kinematics on three differenttimescales: a case study from the southern Swiss Alps, EarthSurf. Process. Landf., 39, 2056\u20132069, doi:10.1002/esp.3599,2014.Scapozza, C., Baron, L., and Lambiel, C.: Borehole Logging inAlpine Periglacial Talus Slopes (Valais, Swiss Alps), PermafrostPeriglacial Process., 26, 67\u201383, doi:10.1002/ppp.1832, 2015.Smith, S. L., Romanovsky, V. E., Lewkowicz, A. G., Burn, C. R.,Allard, M., Clow, G. D., Yoshikawa, K., and Throop, J.: Thermalstate of permafrost in North America: a contribution to the inter-national polar year, Permafrost Periglacial Process., 21, 117\u2013135,doi:10.1002/ppp.690, 2010.Vonder M\u00fchll, D., Hauck, C., and Lehmann, F.: Veri\ufb01ca-tion of geophysical models in Alpine permafrost us-ing borehole information, Ann. Glaciol., 31, 300\u2013306,doi:10.3189/172756400781820057, 2000.Wirz, V., Beutel, J., Gruber, S., Gubler, S., and Purves, R. S.: Esti-mating velocity from noisy GPS data for investigating the tem-poral variability of slope movements, Nat. Hazards Earth Syst.Sci., 14, 2503\u20132520, doi:10.5194/nhess-14-2503-2014, 2014.Zenklusen Mutter, E. and Phillips, M.: Active Layer Charac-teristics At Ten Borehole Sites In Alpine Permafrost Ter-rain, Switzerland, Permafrost Periglacial Process., 23, 138\u2013151,doi:10.1002/ppp.1738, 2012a.Zenklusen Mutter, E. and Phillips, M.: Thermal evidence of recenttalik formation in Ritigraben rock glacier: Swiss Alps, 10th Inter-national Conference on Permafrost, Salekhard, Russia, 479\u2013483,2012b.Zenklusen Mutter, E., Blanchet, J., and Phillips, M.: Analy-sis of ground temperature trends in Alpine permafrost usinggeneralized least squares, J. Geophys. Res., 115, F004009,doi:10.1029/2009JF001648, 2010.www.geogr-helv.net/71/121/2016/ Geogr. Helv., 71, 121\u2013131, 2016 Supplementary resourcesgh-71-121-2016-supplementJune 2016Rachel Luethi\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0Marcia PhillipsDownloadCitations (8)References (44)... Gischig et al., 2011b;Moore et al., 2011). The modeled depth of the thermally active layer matches long-term temperature measurements from a nearby 10-m deep borehole at Eggishorn (Luethi & Phillips, 2016). Our thermal properties and model boundary conditions yield a geothermal gradient of ...... Meanwhile, we assume isotropic thermal properties, even though foliation and geological structure may result in anisotropic behavior. However, despite these simplifications and assumptions, our modeled temperature field matches local observations in a borehole (Luethi & Phillips, 2016), and the pre- dicted amplitudes of seasonal surface displacements fit comfortably within the range of past field measure- ments ( Bakun-Mazor et al., 2013;Gischig et al., 2011b). ...Thermomechanical Stresses Drive Damage of Alpine Valley Rock Walls During Repeat Glacial CyclesArticleFull-text availableSep 2018 Lorenz Gr\u00e4miger Jeffrey R. Moore Simon Loew Valentin GischigCycles of glaciation alter the temperature field in proximal alpine valley flanks, driving rock slope damage through thermomechanical stresses. Here we extend simplified assumptions of glacial debuttressing to quantitatively examine how paraglacial bedrock temperature changes, acting in concert with changing ice loads during Late Pleistocene and Holocene glacial cycles, create damage in adjacent rock slopes and prepare future slope instabilities. When in contact with temperate glacier ice, valley walls maintain near isothermal ~0 \u00b0C surface temperatures and are shielded from daily and annual cycles. With retreat, rock walls are rapidly exposed to strongly varying temperature boundary conditions, a transition we term \u201cparaglacial thermal shock.\u201d Using detailed, conceptual numerical models based on the Aletsch Glacier in Switzerland, we show that including thermomechanical stresses during simulated glacial cycles creates significantly more rock slope damage than predicted for purely mechanical ice loading and unloading. Glacier advances are especially effective in generating damage as rapid cooling drives contraction of the rock mass reducing joint normal stresses. First time exposure to annual temperature cycles during deglaciation induces a shallow damage front that follows the retreating ice margin, generating damage in a complementary process at shorter time scales. Acting on a reduced strength rock mass, modeled thermomechanical cycles enhance the development of a slope instability with similar attributes as observed in our study area. Our results demonstrate that thermomechanical stresses acting in conjunction with changing ice loads are capable of generating considerable rock slope damage with spatial and temporal patterns controlled by glacier extents.ViewShow abstract... According to Holmberg et al. [1997], drift is a temporal shift of sensor response under constant physical and chemical conditions. These conditions are typically induced by water damage to the sensors or water fluxes within the ground, which could affect the interpretation of data to be seen as measurement errors [Luethi and Phillips 2016]. Luethi and Phillips [2016] discussed the challenges and solutions for long-term permafrost borehole temperature monitoring and data interpretation. ...... These conditions are typically induced by water damage to the sensors or water fluxes within the ground, which could affect the interpretation of data to be seen as measurement errors [Luethi and Phillips 2016]. Luethi and Phillips [2016] discussed the challenges and solutions for long-term permafrost borehole temperature monitoring and data interpretation. Utilizing WSN for WQM requires sensors to detect certain parameters in real time, which comes with technology-related limitations known as sensor drift. ...Water Quality Monitoring Using Wireless Sensor Networks: Current Trends and Future Research DirectionsArticleFull-text availableJan 2017ACM T SENSOR NETWORK Kofi Sarpong Adu-Manu Cristiano Tapparello Wendi Heinzelman Jamal-Deen AbdulaiWater is essential for human survival. Although approximately 71% of the world is covered in water, only 2.5% of this is fresh water; hence, fresh water is a valuable resource that must be carefully monitored and maintained. In developing countries, 80% of people are without access to potable water. Cholera is still reported in more than 50 countries. In Africa, 75% of the drinking water comes from underground sources, which makes water monitoring an issue of key concern, aswatermonitoring can be used to trackwater quality changes over time, identify existing or emerging problems, and design effective intervention programs to remedy water pollution. It is important to have detailed knowledge of potable water quality to enable proper treatment and also prevent contamination. In this article, we review methods for water quality monitoring (WQM) from traditional manual methods to more technologically advanced methods employing wireless sensor networks (WSNs) for in situ WQM. In particular, we highlight recent developments in the sensor devices, data acquisition procedures, communication and network architectures, and power management schemes to maintain a long-lived operational WQM system. Finally, we discuss open issues that need to be addressed to further advance automatic WQM using WSNs.ViewShow abstractRecent evolution of damage to infrastructure on permafrost in the French AlpsArticleFull-text availableFeb 2019REG ENVIRON CHANGE Marco Marcer Pierre-Allain Duvillard Philippe Schoeneich Ludovic RavanelThe past four decades have seen extensive development of the winter sport industry in the French Alps and several hundred ropeway transport systems have been installed in areas where mountain permafrost may be present. Due to current climatic change and the ensuing permafrost degradation, the vulnerability of these infrastructures to destabilization may increase. Therefore, there is a real potential for instabilities to develop on ropeway transport systems in the Alps, requiring a better understanding of these processes. This study investigates the relation between permafrost and infrastructure stability in the French Alps, seeking to understand the evolution of this phenomenon over the past decades. This was done by following a two-step analysis. At first, the infrastructure elements built on modeled permafrost-affected areas were inventoried at the scale of the French Alps in order to get an overview of the possible vulnerabilities. Then, our study presents a detailed historical inventory of damage to infrastructure over the past three decades in different geomorphologic contexts. Overall, in the French Alps, there are almost 1000 infrastructure elements located in permafrost areas among which 12 (i.e., 24 infrastructure elements) were identified to have been subject to repeated instances of disruption and deterioration and most of the damages recorded were in areas where permafrost degradation is fully expected (ice-rich terrain). Infrastructure recovery costs may be significantly high, making this issue a relevant consideration to be included in the design process.ViewShow abstractA decade of detailed observations (2008\u20132018) in steep bedrock permafrost at Matterhorn H\u00f6rnligrat (Zermatt, CH)ArticleFull-text availableFeb 2019 Reto Da Forno Samuel Weber Mustafa Yuecel Jan BeutelThe PermaSense project is an ongoing interdisciplinary effort between geo-science and engineering disciplines started in 2006 with the goals to make observations possible that previously have not been possible. Specifically the aims are to obtain measurements data in unprecedented quantity and quality based on technological advances. This paper describes a unique ten+ year data record obtained from in-situ measurements in steep bedrock permafrost in an Alpine environment on the Matterhorn H\u00f6rnligrat, Zermatt Switzerland at 3500 m a.s.l. Through the utilization of state-of-the-art wireless sensor technology it was possible to obtain more data of higher quality, make this data available in near real-time and tightly monitor and control the running experiments. This data set (DOI: https://doi.org/10.1594/PANGAEA.897640, Weber et al., 2019a) constitutes the longest, densest and most diverse data record in the history of mountain permafrost research worldwide with 17 different sensor types used at 29 distinct sensor locations consisting of over 114.5 million data points captured over a period of ten+ years. By documenting and sharing this data in this form we contribute to making our past research reproducible and facilitate future research based on this data e.g. in the area of analysis methodology, comparative studies, assessment of change in the environment, natural hazard warning and the development of process models.ViewShow abstractPermafrost is warming at a global scaleArticleFull-text availableDec 2019 Jeannette Noetzli Boris K Biskaborn Hugues Lantuit Sharon L. SmithPermafrost warming has the potential to amplify global climate change, because when frozen sediments thaw it unlocks soil organic carbon. Yet to date, no globally consistent assessment of permafrost temperature change has been compiled. Here we use a global data set of permafrost temperature time series from the Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost to evaluate temperature change across permafrost regions for the period since the International Polar Year (2007\u20132009). During the reference decade between 2007 and 2016, ground temperature near the depth of zero annual amplitude in the continuous permafrost zone increased by 0.39 \u00b1 0.15 \u00b0C. Over the same period, discontinuous permafrost warmed by 0.20 \u00b1 0.10 \u00b0C. Permafrost in mountains warmed by 0.19 \u00b1 0.05 \u00b0C and in Antarctica by 0.37 \u00b1 0.10 \u00b0C. Globally, permafrost temperature increased by 0.29 \u00b1 0.12 \u00b0C. The observed trend follows the Arctic amplification of air temperature increase in the Northern Hemisphere. In the discontinuous zone, however, ground warming occurred due to increased snow thickness while air temperature remained statistically unchanged.ViewShow abstractRecent evolution of an ice-cored moraine at the Gentianes Pass, Valais Alps, SwitzerlandArticleJul 2018LAND DEGRAD DEV Pierre-Allain Duvillard Ludovic Ravanel Christophe Lambiel Michel JaboyedoffLateral moraines located in permafrost environments are susceptible to preserve large amount of both glacier and periglacial ice. To understand how ice\u2010cored moraines located in high alpine environments evolve in a context of both glacier retreat and permafrost degradation, we performed, 11 terrestrial laser\u2010scanning measurement campaigns between 2007 and 2014 on a highly anthropogenic overprinted moraine prone to instability. Resulting comparison of the subsequent 3D models allowed to qualitatively and quantitatively analyze the morphological evolution of the moraine. The comparisons indicate a very high geomorphic activity of the moraine including large areas affected by downslope movements of blocks and 10 landslides with a volume between 24 \u00b1 1 and 1138 \u00b1 47 m\u00b3. Data also indicated a very strong ice melt with a loss of ice thickness locally reaching 17.7 m at the foot of the moraine. These results, compared with resistivity and thermal measurements of the ground, suggest the combined role of ice loss at the foot of the moraine and the permafrost activity/warming in triggering these processes.ViewShow abstractInstrumentation thermique et cin\u00e9matique des parois \u00e0 permafrost du massif du Mont Blanc.BookFull-text availableJan 2017 Pierre-Allain Duvillard Emmanuel Malet Stephan Gruber Ludovic RavanelUnlike the superficial deposits in which the presence of permafrost is indicated by geomorphological evidences, its occurrence in the rock walls can only be suggested by the existence of perennial ice sheets or hanging glaciers. Everywhere else, only indirect (geophysics) or direct temperature measurements make it possible to verify its presence. In these rock walls, permafrost and its degradation due to global warming are at the origin of rock falls and rock avalanches with a devastating power. In order to know the state and the thermal evolution of the rock walls, to parameterize or validate the permafrost distribution models, or to survey the kinematics of the fractures in the bedrock, it is necessary to monitor these rock walls. This article presents the methods of instrumentation and the equipment used for more than 10 years in the Mont Blanc massif as well as the associated research questions.ViewShow abstractNew insights on permafrost genesis and conservation in talus slopes based on observations at Fl\u00fcelapass, Eastern SwitzerlandArticleApr 2017GEOMORPHOLOGY Manfred Buchroithner Robert Kenner Christian Hauck Marcia PhillipsThe talus slope at Fl\u00fcelapass was the first mountain permafrost study site in Switzerland in the 1970s and the presence of ice-rich permafrost at the foot of the slope has been investigated in the context of several studies focusing on the role of snow cover distribution. We review previously developed hypotheses and present new ones using various data sources, such as temperature measurements in boreholes, a subaquatic DEM generated from unmanned aerial system (UAS) photogrammetry, terrestrial laser scan measurements of snow depth, geophysical ground investigations and automatic time-lapse photography. From this combination of data sources together with observations in the field, an interesting sequence of geomorphologic processes is established at Fl\u00fcelapass. As a result we show how mass wasting processes can initiate the genesis and long-term conservation of ice-rich permafrost at the base of a talus slope.ViewShow abstractThermal characteristics of permafrost in the steep alpine rock walls of the Aiguille du Midi (Mont Blanc Massif, 3842 m a.s.l)ArticleFull-text availableJan 2015TCD Florence Magnin Paolo Pogliotti Ludovic Ravanel Philip DelinePermafrost and related thermo-hydro-mechanical processes are thought to influence high alpine rock wall stability, but a lack of field measurements means that the characteristics and processes of rock wall permafrost are poorly understood. To help remedy this situation, in 2005 work began to install a monitoring system at the Aiguille du Midi (3842 m a.s.l). This paper presents temperature records from nine surface sensors (eight years of records) and three 10 m deep boreholes (4 years of records), installed at locations with different surface and bedrock characteristics. In line with previous studies, our temperature data analyses showed that: micro-meteorology controls the surface temperature, active layer thicknesses are directly related to aspect and ranged fromViewShow abstractModelling Transient Ground Surface Temperatures of Past Rockfall Events: Towards a Better Understanding of Failure Mechanisms in Changing Periglacial EnvironmentsArticleFull-text availableOct 2015GEOGR ANN A Rachel Luethi Stephan Gruber Ludovic RavanelDespite the rising interest in mountain permafrost due to climatic changes and a noticed increase of registered rockfall events in the European Alps and other mountain ranges, little is known about transient thermal conditions in the detachment areas of rockfalls. Temperature conditions prior to the rockfall events of 144 past events in the European Alps were modelled with a physically based ground temperature model. To minimise the impact that uncertainty has on interpretations, only relative values were used, that is, percentiles obtained from cumulative distribution functions of the modelled ground surface temperatures from the beginning of the meteorological measurement series up to the event dates. Our results suggest that small and mid-sized rockfalls (volumes up to 100 000 m3) from high elevation occurred mainly during short-term periods of unusually high temperatures. This was neither found to be a result of the seasonal distribution (most analysed events in higher elevations occurred from July to September) nor of the longer-term temporal distribution (most analysed events occurred after 2000) only. Plausible explanations are either a destabilisation related to advective thaw or failure due to stress redistribution caused by large temperature variations. Large deep-seated rock slope failures (\u2265100 000 m3) in high elevation occurred all year round.ViewShow abstractSnow as a driving factor of rock surface temperatures in steep rough rock wallsArticleOct 2015COLD REG SCI TECHNOL Anna Haberkorn Robert Kenner Martin Hoelzle Marcia PhillipsObservations show that considerable amounts of snow can accumulate in steep, rough rock walls. The heterogeneously distributed snow cover significantly affects the surface energy balance and hence the thermal regime of the rock walls.To assess the small-scale variability of snow depth and rock temperatures in steep north and south facing rock walls, a spatially distributed multi-method approach is applied at Gemsstock, Switzerland, combining 35 continuous near-surface rock temperature measurements, high resolution snow depth observations using terrestrial laser scanning, as well as in-situ snow pit investigations.The thermal regime of the rock surface is highly dependent on short- and longwave radiation, albedo, surface roughness, snow depth and on snow distribution in time and space. Around 2. m of snow can accumulate on slopes with angles up to 75\u00b0, due to micro-topographic structures like ledges. Hence, contrasts in mean annual rock surface temperature between the north and the south facing slopes are less than 4. \u00b0C. However, significant small-scale variability of up to 10. \u00b0C in mean daily rock surface temperature occurs within a few metres over the rock walls due to the variable snow distribution, revealing the heterogeneity and complexity of the thermal regime at a very local scale. In addition, multiple linear regression could explain up to 77% of near-surface rock temperature variability, which underlines the importance of radiation and snow depth and thus also of the topography.In the rock faces the thermal insulation of the ground starts with snow depths exceeding 0.2. m. This is due to the high thermal resistance of a less densely packed snow cover, especially in the north facing slope. Additionally, aspect induced differences of snow cover characteristics and consequently thermal conductivities are observed in the rock walls.ViewShow abstractOverview of rock glacier kinematics research in the Swiss AlpsArticleFull-text availableJan 2010 Isabelle G\u00e4rtner-Roer Reynald Delaloye Christophe LambielOverview of rock glacier kinematics research in the Swiss Alps: seasonal rhythm, interannual variations and trends over several decades Delaloye, R; Lambiel, C; G\u00e4rtner-Roer, I Delaloye, R; Lambiel, C; G\u00e4rtner-Roer, I (2010). Overview of rock glacier kinematics research in the Swiss Alps: seasonal rhythm, interannual variations and trends over several decades. Geographica Helvetica, 65(2):135-145.ViewShow abstractThermal Regime of Rock and its Relation to Snow Cover in Steep Alpine Rock Walls: Gemsstock, Central Swiss AlpsArticleMar 2015Geogr Ann Phys Geogr Anna Haberkorn Robert Kenner Martin Hoelzle Marcia PhillipsSnow cover influences the thermal regime and stability of frozen rock walls. In this study, we investigate and model the impact of the spatially variable snow cover on the thermal regime of steep permafrost rock walls. This is necessary for a more detailed understanding of the thermal and mechanical processes causing changes in rock temperature and in the ice and water contents of frozen rock, which possibly lead to rock wall instability. To assess the temporal and spatial evolution and influence of the snow, detailed measurements have been carried out at two selected points in steep north- and south-facing rock walls since 2012. In parallel, the one-dimensional energy balance model SNOWPACK is used to simulate the effects of snow cover on the thermal regime of the rock walls. For this, a multi-method approach with high temporal resolution is applied, combining meteorological, borehole rock temperature and terrain parameter measurements. To validate the results obtained for the ground thermal regime and the seasonally varying snowpack, the model output is compared with near-surface rock temperature measurements and remote snow cover observations.No decrease of snow depth at slope angles up to 70\u00b0 was observed in rough terrain due to micro-topographic structures. Strong contrasts in rock temperatures between north- and south-facing slopes are due to differences in solar radiation, slope angle and the timing and depth of the snow cover.SNOWPACK proved to be useful for modelling snow cover\u2013rock interactions in smooth, homogenous rock slopes.ViewShow abstractActive Layer Characteristics At Ten Borehole Sites In Alpine Permafrost Terrain, SwitzerlandArticleApr 2012 Evelyn Zenklusen Mutter Marcia PhillipsThis study investigates and compares active layer characteristics determined from ground temperature measurements at ten borehole sites in various types of Alpine permafrost terrain. Active layer thickness (ALT) remained fairly constant at the individual boreholes over the past five to 14 years, but was highly variable among the sites due to local terrain characteristics. To allow intra-site comparisons, a characteristic depth within the active layer was determined for each site. The temperature series either measured or interpolated for that depth were used to investigate different thermal stages during the annual thawing and refreezing cycle. The relation between air temperature thawing-degree days and ALT was investigated on an annual, seasonal and daily basis. The results show that at least daily data are required to establish the relevant characteristics of active layer development. Periods of slow advance of the thaw plane, interpreted as being due to the presence of ice-bearing layers within the active layer, are particularly important to the final ALT. Rapid active layer deepening, however, can occur due to the formation of taliks caused by lateral thermal disturbances below the active layer. Copyright \u00a9 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.ViewShow abstractAssessing the rock glacier kinematics on three different time scales: a case study from the Southern Swiss AlpsArticleDec 2014 Claudio Bozzini Cristian Scapozza Marco Conedera Christophe LambielSurface temperature increases since the 1990s have often been associated with an increase in the speed of rock glaciers. Evidence of similar links on the centennial to millennial scale are, however, still lacking due to less focus to date on the medium- and long-term kinematics of these landforms. In order to assess (palaeo)climatic variations in rock glacier kinematics, we analysed the movements of the Stabbio di Largario rock glacier in the Southern Swiss Alps using three different time scales. The Schmidt hammer exposure-age dating (SHD) was applied to study long-term kinematics in order to extrapolate the minimal age of the formation of the rock glacier, which may have started its development after the Mid-Holocene climate optimum, and to detect possible accelerations of the horizontal surface velocity during the Medieval Warm Period. Georeferentiation and orthorectification of six historical photographs of the rock glacier taken between ad 1910 and today were analysed using monoplotting to detect the rock glacier displacement on the decennial scale from the end of the Little Ice Age. Finally, differential GPS monitoring data available since ad 2009 were used to assess annual and seasonal creep rates of the rock glacier at present. Our results show a link between the periods of increase in mean air temperature on different time scales and variations in rock glacier kinematics and provide important new insights into rock glacier development and evolution on the long-term scale. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.ViewShow abstractModellierung und Messung von Permafrosttemperaturen im Gipfelgrat der Zugspitze, DeutschlandArticleFull-text availableJan 2010Geograph Helv Jeannette Noetzli Stephan Gruber von Poschinger AndreasIm Gebiet der Zugspitze, dem mit 2962 m \u00fc.M. h\u00f6chsten Berg Deutschlands, sind auch die bedeutendsten Permafrostvorkommen des Landes zu finden. Der Felsgrat der Zugspitze ist steil und stark bebaut. Schon w\u00e4hrend der Bauarbeiten in den 1960er Jahren wurden massives Eis in Kl\u00fcften und gefrorene Lockersedimente entdeckt. Allf\u00e4llige Stabilit\u00e4tsprobleme durch Permafrostdegradation k\u00f6nnen entscheidende Konsequenzen auf Bauwerke haben. Deshalb wurde im August 2007 f\u00fcr langfristige Permafrostbeobachtung eine Bohrung quer durch den Gipfelgrat gemacht und mit einer Thermistorenkette ausgestattet. In einer Vorstudie wurden die Temperaturverh\u00e4ltnisse mit Computermodellen simuliert. Resultate zeigen Permafrost mit Temperaturen bis etwa -3 \u00b0C in der Nordseite und in Teilen der S\u00fcdseite. Die Permafrostgrenze verl\u00e4uft im Inneren des Grates und ist im oberen Bereich fast senkrecht. Die nach der Realisierung der Bohrung gemessenen Temperaturen sind etwas niedriger als im Modell, stimmen aber im Allgemeinen gut mit den Ergebnissen der Simulation \u00fcberein, insbesondere wenn auch transiente Effekte und der Einfluss latenter W\u00e4rme ber\u00fccksichtigt werden. Monitoring und Modellstudien des Permafrosts in der Zugspitze werden im Rahmen von internationalen Projekten weitergef\u00fchrt und ausgebaut. Schl\u00fcsselw\u00f6rter: Felspermafrost, dreidimensionale Modellierung, Bohrlochtemperaturen, ZugspitzeViewShow abstractWhy permafrost rocks become unstable: A rock-ice-mechanical model in time and spaceArticleJun 2013 Friederike K. G\u00fcnzel Daniel Funk Michael KrautblatterIn this paper, we develop a mechanical model that relates the destabilization of thawing permafrost rock slopes to temperature-related effects on both, rock- and ice-mechanics; and laboratory testing of key assumptions is performed. Degrading permafrost is considered to be an important factor for rock\u2013slope failures in alpine and arctic environments, but the mechanics are poorly understood. The destabilization is commonly attributed to changes in ice-mechanical properties while bedrock friction and fracture propagation have not been considered yet. However, fracture toughness, compressive and tensile strength decrease by up to 50% and more when intact water-saturated rock thaws. Based on literature and experiments, we develop a modified Mohr\u2013Coulomb failure criterion for ice-filled rock fractures that incorporates fracturing of rock bridges, friction of rough fracture surfaces, ductile creep of ice and detachment mechanisms along rock\u2013ice interfaces. Novel laboratory setups were developed to assess the temperature dependency of the friction of ice-free rock\u2013rock interfaces and the shear detachment of rock\u2013ice interfaces. In degrading permafrost, rock-mechanical properties may control early stages of destabilization and become more important for higher normal stress, i.e. higher magnitudes of rock\u2013slope failure. Ice-mechanical properties outbalance the importance of rock-mechanical components after the deformation accelerates and are more relevant for smaller magnitudes. The model explains why all magnitudes of rock\u2013slope failures can be prepared and triggered by permafrost degradation and is capable of conditioning long para-glacial response times. Here, we present a synoptic rock- and ice-mechanical model that explains the mechanical destabilization processes operating in warming permafrost rocks.ViewShow abstractInstability of a High Alpine Rock Ridge: The Lower Ar\u00eate Des Cosmiques, Mont Blanc Massif, FranceArticleApr 2012GEOGR ANN A Christian Vincent Ludovic Ravanel Christophe Lambiel Philip DelineRockfalls are dominant in the rock slopes and rock ridge morphodynamics in high mountain areas and endanger people who pass along or stay there, as well as infrastructure that host them (cable cars, refuges). Risks are probably greater now because of fast permafrost degradation and regression of surface ice, two consequences of the atmospheric warming of the last decades. These two commonly associated factors are involved in the instability of rock slopes by modifying the mechanical behaviour of often ice-filled rock fractures and the mechanical constraints in the rock masses. This paper examines over 15 years the instability of the lower Ar\u00eate des Cosmiques on the French side of the Mont Blanc massif. Its vulnerability is due to the presence of a high-capacity refuge on its top (3613m a.s.l.). In 1998, a part of the refuge was left without support when a collapse of 600m3 occurred immediately below it. Since this date, reinforcement work has been carried out in this area, but the whole ridge has been affected by around 15 relatively shallow rockfalls. Through a multidisciplinary approach, this article assesses the role of the cryospheric factors in the triggering of these rockfalls.ViewShow abstractShow moreAdJoin ResearchGate to find the people and research you need to help your work.15+ million members118+ million publications700k+ research projectsJoin for freeRecommendationsDiscover more publications, questions and projects in PermafrostProjectParaglacial, periglacial rock slope stability Andrew Kos Florian Amann Marcia PhillipsRole of rapid glacier retreat on rock slope stability View projectProjectInfluence of snow cover on thermal and mechanic processes in steep permafrost rockwalls (2011 - 2015) Daniel Draebing Michael Krautblatter Marcia Phillips[...] Robert KennerThe project\u2019s aim was the investigation of the impact of the snow cover on thermal dynamics and mechanical responses in steep permafrost rockwalls. Given that 90 % or more of all permafrost rock wa lls inherit significant snow accumulations and that snow cover and meltwater exert a massive influence on thermal and mechanical behaviour, the understanding of snow control in steep permafrost rocks is among the major challenges in cryosphere research. We targeted at developing 1) process understanding for thermal and mechanical snow impact quantification, 2) a modelling framework for a coupled understanding of thermal and mechanical snow interaction and 3) a future understanding for estimating the impact of snow cover scenarios in steep permafrost rock walls. The ISPR\u2010project seeks to understand the influence of snow cover on the thermal and mechanical regime in steep permafrost rockwalls. The investigation of the external forcing (Part 2) was the main focus of the Swiss project partners, while the German project partners (Part 1) concentrated on the internal mechanical, thermal and systemic response of the rockwalls. German Team: Michael Krautblatter (Lead), Richard Dikau, Daniel Draebing (PhD student) Swiss Team: Marcia Phillips (Lead), Martin Hoelzle, Anna Haberkorn (PhD student), Robert Kenner Publications: Part 1 and 2: Thermal and Mechanical Responses Resulting From Spatial and Temporal Snow Cover Variability in Permafrost Rock Slopes, Steintaelli, Swiss Alps (PPP) http://bit.ly/2rYlbcM Seasonally intermittent water flow through deep fractures in an Alpine Rock Ridge: Gemsstock, Central Swiss Alps (CRST) http://bit.ly/2t2qFCY Part 1 (German Team): Thermo-cryogenic controls of fracture kinematics in permafrost rockwalls (GRL) http://bit.ly/2s2EpJb Application of refraction seismics in alpine permafrost studies: A review (ESR) http://bit.ly/2sxMtoZ Interaction of thermal and mechanical processes in steep permafrost rock walls: A conceptual approach (Geomorphology) http://bit.ly/2sY2Uvp Pseudo 3D - P-wave refraction seismic monitoring of permafrost in steep unstable bedrock (JGR) http://bit.ly/2sXQ2Wa P-wave velocity changes in freezing hard low-porosity rocks: A laboratory-based time-average model (Cryosphere) http://bit.ly/2s2pVsV Part 2 (Swiss Team): Snowpack characteristics on steep frozen rock slopes (CRST) http://bit.ly/2rYEDpB Distributed snow and rock temperature modelling in steep rock walls using Alpine3D (Cryosphere) http://bit.ly/2t24Va5 Snow as a driving factor of rock surface temperatures in steep rough rock walls (CRST) http://bit.ly/2s2Cc0j Thermal Regime of Rock and its Relation to Snow Cover in Steep Alpine Rock Walls: Gemsstock, Central Swiss Alps (Geogr Ann) http://bit.ly/2tVBvHv ... [more]View projectProjectPERMOS Jeannette Noetzli Marcia Phillips Reynald Delaloye[...] Robert KennerThe Swiss Permafrost Monitoring Network (PERMOS) systematically documents the state and changes of mountain permafrost in the Swiss Alps based on long-term terrestrial measurements. View projectProjectSloMove C. Iasio Gabriele Amato G. Fubelli[...] Andreas Paul ZischgSloMove studies the opportunities offered by SAR remote sensing systems to monitor soil deformation. Monitoring soil deformation is part of the ordinary activities carried out by public and private bodies responsible for risk management and land protection. The methodology used covers all stages, from the gathering of data to the update of natural threats prevention instruments. After refining and sharing the most recent technologies, the partners choose the areas (both in Italy and Switzerland) to be tested for the integration of satellite and terrestrial monitoring systems on soil deformation. Updates on risk management criteria, techniques and procedures will be given through technical workshops and guidelines aimed at people responsible for safeguarding the area. ... [more]View projectArticleEstimating Non-Conductive Heat Flow Leading to Intra-Permafrost Talik Formation at the Ritigraben Ro...June 2016 \u00b7 Permafrost and Periglacial Processes Rachel Luethi Marcia Phillips Michael LehningAlthough non-conductive heat flow plays an important role in the evolution of rock glacier temperature and dynamics, few studies have quantified it. At the Ritigraben rock glacier (Switzerland), intra-permafrost talik formation was observed at around 12m depth and related to snowmelt and rainfall infiltration. Our aim is to attribute the talik formation to physical processes by quantifying the ... [Show full abstract] heat required to explain the observed dynamics of the temperature profile. We combined measured borehole temperatures, meteorological data and borehole logs with physics-based modelling experiments using the one-dimensional SNOWPACK model. The simulations were run with a simulated heat sink/source controlled by modelled snow cover, measured meteorological data and borehole temperature measurements. This allowed us to estimate non-conductive heat flow for different synthetic ground profiles with varying physical properties based on borehole logs. Our model results corroborate the assumption that purely conductive heat exchange is incompatible with the observed talik formation. We attribute the talik to advective and conductive heating by infiltrating water (which causes local heating rates to the order of 1Wm-3) and circulating air (which causes cooling to the order of 0.1Wm-3).Read moreArticleFull-text availableDistinguishing ice-rich and ice-poor permafrost to map ground temperatures and -ice content in the S...January 2019 \u00b7 The Cryosphere Discussions Jeannette Noetzli Robert Kenner Martin Hoelzle[...] Marcia PhillipsA new countrywide permafrost distribution map of Switzerland is presented, indicating ground temperatures and ice content. The new representation of ground temperatures is achieved by distinguishing ice-poor and ice-rich permafrost in the modelling process. There is a very significant correlation of ground temperatures with elevation and potential incoming solar radiation in ice-poor and ice-free ... [Show full abstract] ground. The distribution of ice-rich permafrost was defined by modelling mass wasting processes and the integration of snow and ice into the ground caused by them. This dual approach allowed a clear improvement in the cartographic representation of permafrost-free elevational belts which are bordered above and below by permafrost. The reproduction of such commonly occurring permafrost gaps allowed a higher mapping accuracy and unambiguity of the mapping zones. Permafrost occurrence is represented by two clearly defined classes: Zone 1 representing modelled ground temperatures and zone 2 indicating excess ground ice outside of zone 1. 58% of 92 validation sites could be definitively classified as having permafrost or no permafrost. If only ice-poor or \u2013free ground is considered, this value reaches 90%. The rather simple dependency of ice-poor permafrost on two main parameters is not only relevant for mapping but also for a wide range of scientific and engineering purposes.View full-textArticleRock slope failure in a recently deglaciated permafrost rock wall at Piz Kesch (Eastern Swiss Alps),...July 2016 \u00b7 Earth Surface Processes and Landforms Rachel LuethiAndrea Wolter Yves B\u00fchler[...] Marcia PhillipsIn February 2014, a rock pillar with a volume of around 150 000 m3 collapsed at Piz Kesch in the Eastern Swiss Alps. A reconstruction of the conditions prior to the event and of the event itself is presented on the basis of different sources of data. The methods applied include photogrammetry, terrestrial laser scanning, structural geological analysis, examination of meteorological data, ... [Show full abstract] carbon-14 (14C) dating of organic material in permafrost ice from a tension crack and numerical modelling of likely modes of failure. Despite a complete lack of in situ measurements in the rock wall prior to the event and of direct observations during the event, the available data allow the determination of the approximate timing of the event as well as the structural predisposition, the probable mode of failure and the timescale of several millennia involved in the triggering of the failure of the rock pillar. The interdisciplinary analysis of this event contributes towards understanding the complex interaction of processes involved in large rock slope failures currently occurring in warming mountain permafrost regions. CopyrightRead moreArticleFull-text availableModelling Transient Ground Surface Temperatures of Past Rockfall Events: Towards a Better Understand...October 2015 \u00b7 Geografiska Annaler Series A Physical Geography Rachel Luethi Stephan Gruber Ludovic RavanelDespite the rising interest in mountain permafrost due to climatic changes and a noticed increase of registered rockfall events in the European Alps and other mountain ranges, little is known about transient thermal conditions in the detachment areas of rockfalls. Temperature conditions prior to the rockfall events of 144 past events in the European Alps were modelled with a physically based ... [Show full abstract] ground temperature model. To minimise the impact that uncertainty has on interpretations, only relative values were used, that is, percentiles obtained from cumulative distribution functions of the modelled ground surface temperatures from the beginning of the meteorological measurement series up to the event dates. Our results suggest that small and mid-sized rockfalls (volumes up to 100 000 m3) from high elevation occurred mainly during short-term periods of unusually high temperatures. This was neither found to be a result of the seasonal distribution (most analysed events in higher elevations occurred from July to September) nor of the longer-term temporal distribution (most analysed events occurred after 2000) only. Plausible explanations are either a destabilisation related to advective thaw or failure due to stress redistribution caused by large temperature variations. Large deep-seated rock slope failures (\u2265100 000 m3) in high elevation occurred all year round.View full-textDiscover moreDownload citationWhat type of file do you want? RIS BibTeX Plain TextWhat do you want to download? Citation only Citation and abstractDownloadInterested in research on Permafrost?Join ResearchGate to discover and stay up-to-date with the latest research from leading experts in Permafrost and many other scientific topics.Join for freeorDiscover by subject areaRecruit researchersJoin for freeLoginEmail Tip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inor log in withWelcome back! Please log in.Email \u00b7 HintTip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inor log in withNo account? Sign upAboutNewsCompanyCareersSupportHelp centerFAQBusiness solutionsRecruitingAdvertisingAd\u00a9 ResearchGate 2019. All rights reserved.ImprintTermsPrivacy", "(PDF) Permafrost is warming at a global scale We use cookies to make interactions with our website easy and meaningful, to better understand the use of our services, and to tailor advertising. For further information, including about cookie settings, please read our Cookie Policy . By continuing to use this site, you consent to the use of cookies.Got ittopSee all \u203a5 CitationsSee all \u203a51 ReferencesDownload citationShare Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Google+ RedditDownload full-text PDFPermafrost is warming at a global scaleArticle (PDF Available)\u2002in\u2002Nature Communications 10(1)\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0December 2019\u2002with\u2002646 ReadsDOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-08240-4 Cite this publication Boris K Biskaborn24.23Alfred Wegener Institute Helmholtz Centre for Polar and Marine Research Sharon L. Smith+ 44 Jeannette Noetzli26.3WSL Institute for Snow and Avalanche Research SLF Heidrun Matthes22.74Alfred Wegener Institute Helmholtz Centre for Polar and Marine ResearchShow more authorsHideAbstractPermafrost warming has the potential to amplify global climate change, because when frozen sediments thaw it unlocks soil organic carbon. Yet to date, no globally consistent assessment of permafrost temperature change has been compiled. Here we use a global data set of permafrost temperature time series from the Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost to evaluate temperature change across permafrost regions for the period since the International Polar Year (2007\u20132009). During the reference decade between 2007 and 2016, ground temperature near the depth of zero annual amplitude in the continuous permafrost zone increased by 0.39 \u00b1 0.15 \u00b0C. Over the same period, discontinuous permafrost warmed by 0.20 \u00b1 0.10 \u00b0C. Permafrost in mountains warmed by 0.19 \u00b1 0.05 \u00b0C and in Antarctica by 0.37 \u00b1 0.10 \u00b0C. Globally, permafrost temperature increased by 0.29 \u00b1 0.12 \u00b0C. The observed trend follows the Arctic amplification of air temperature increase in the Northern Hemisphere. In the discontinuous zone, however, ground warming occurred due to increased snow thickness while air temperature remained statistically unchanged.Discover the world's research15+ million members118+ million publications700k+ research projectsJoin for free Content uploaded by Hugues LantuitAuthor contentAll content in this area was uploaded by Hugues Lantuit on Jan 17, 2019 Download full-text PDF ARTICLEPermafrost is warming at a global scaleBoris K. Biskaborn et al.#Permafrost warming has the potential to amplify global climate change, because when frozensediments thaw it unlocks soil organic carbon. Yet to date, no globally consistent assessmentof permafrost temperature change has been compiled. Here we use a global data set ofpermafrost temperature time series from the Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost toevaluate temperature change across permafrost regions for the period since the InternationalPolar Year (2007\u20132009). During the reference decade between 2007 and 2016, groundtemperature near the depth of zero annual amplitude in the continuous permafrost zoneincreased by 0.39 \u00b1 0.15 \u00b0C. Over the same period, discontinuous permafrost warmed by0.20 \u00b1 0.10 \u00b0C. Permafrost in mountains warmed by 0.19 \u00b1 0.05 \u00b0C and in Antarctica by 0.37\u00b1 0.10 \u00b0C. Globally, permafrost temperature increased by 0.29 \u00b1 0.12 \u00b0C. The observed trendfollows the Arctic ampli\ufb01cation of air temperature increase in the Northern Hemisphere. Inthe discontinuous zone, however, ground warming occurred due to increased snow thicknesswhile air temperature remained statistically unchanged.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-4 OPEN. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to B.K.B. (email: boris.biskaborn@awi.de).#A full list of authors and their af\ufb01liationsappears at the end of the paper.NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:264 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08 240-4| www.nature.com/naturecommunications 11234567890():,; One quarter of the Northern Hemisphere and 17% of theEarth\u2019s exposed land surface is underlain by permafrost1,that is ground with a temperature remaining at or below0 \u00b0C for at least two consecutive years. The thermal state ofpermafrost is sensitive to changing climatic conditions andin particular to rising air temperatures and changing snowregimes2\u20137. This is important, because over the past few decades,the atmosphere in polar and high elevation regions has warmedfaster than elsewhere8. Even if global air temperature increased byno more than 2 \u00b0C by 2100, permafrost may still degrade over asigni\ufb01cant area9. Such a change would have serious consequencesfor ecosystems, hydrological systems, and infrastructure integ-rity10\u201312. Carbon release resulting from permafrost degradationwill potentially impact the Earth\u2019s climate system because largeamounts of carbon previously locked in frozen organic matterwill decompose into carbon dioxide and methane13\u201315. Thisprocess is expected to augment global warming by 0.13\u20130.27 \u00b0Cby 2100 and by up to 0.42 \u00b0C by 230015. Despite this, permafrostchange is not yet adequately represented in most of the EarthSystem Models14 that are used for the IPCC projections fordecision makers. One major reason for this was the absence of astandardized global data set of permafrost temperature observa-tions for model validation.Prior to the International Polar Year (IPY, 2007\u20132009), groundtemperatures were measured in boreholes scattered across per-mafrost regions. However, a globally organized permafrost datanetwork and a standard reference period against which tem-perature change could be measured did not exist. One key out-come of the IPY was strenghtening the Global TerrestrialNetwork for Permafrost (GTN-P)16,4. This initiative established atemperature reference baseline for permafrost and led to anincrease in the number of accessible boreholes used for tem-perature monitoring.To analyze the thermal change of permafrost we assembled aglobal permafrost-temperature data set that includes time seriesof data attributed to the IPY reference boreholes. We compiled atime series for the decade from 2007 to 2016 that comprises meanannual ground temperatures\ue001T, determined from temperaturesmeasured in boreholes within the continuous and discontinuouspermafrost zones in the Arctic (including the Subarctic), Ant-arctica and at high elevations outside the polar regions. Themeasurements were made at, or as close as possible to the depthof zero annual amplitude Z*, where seasonal changes in groundtemperature are negligible (\u22640.1 \u00b0C). Rates of permafrost tem-perature change calculated for the 2007\u20132016 decade wereindexed in each borehole to suppress near-surface and deepgeothermal changes. Regional and global change rates were cal-culated as area-weighted means. To compare single borehole sites,due to the higher availability of full-year records after 2007, weranked the temperature difference between the biennial means of2008\u20132009 and 2015\u20132016. We used linear regression on\ue001Tbetween 2007\u20132016 to estimate decadal change rates. To calculateannual departures, we compared consecutive years to the refer-ence mean of 2008\u20132009. We concluded, that ground tempera-ture near the depth of zero annual amplitude increased in allpermafrost zones on Earth, that is continuous and discontinuouspermafrost in the Northern Hemisphere, as well as permafrost inthe mountains and in Antarctica. The observed trend followedincreased air temperature and snow thickness, each in varyingdegrees depending on the region.ResultsPermafrost temperature changes. Measurements from boreholesites established prior to the IPY generally indicated warmingdriven by higher air temperatures (Fig. 1)4,17,18. Our new data setcontains 154 boreholes of which 123 allow calculation of decadaltemperature change rates based on adequate time series. Theremaining 31 boreholes provide additional information on annualdepartures. Our results show that in the decade after the IPYpermafrost warmed within 71 boreholes, cooled in 12, andremained unchanged (within measurement accuracy) in theremaining 40 (Fig. 2). The ground temperature rose above 0 \u00b0C in\ufb01ve boreholes, indicating thawing at the measurement depth of10 m at Z*. The largest increase of\ue001Tover the observed referencedecade between 2007 and 2016 was 0.39 \u00b1 0.15 \u00b0C dec\ue0011Ref in theArctic continuous permafrost zone. The greatest permafrosttemperature changes observed in individual boreholes (\u0394\ue001Tb) since2008\u20132009 were 0.93 and 0.90 \u00b0C in northwestern Siberia (MarreSale, 10 m) and northeastern Siberia (Samoylov Island, 20.75 m),respectively. The discontinuous permafrost zone experiencedwarming of 0.20 \u00b1 0.10 \u00b0C dec\ue0011Ref . The largest \u0394\ue001Tbsince2008\u20132009 of 0.95 \u00b0C was observed in southeastern Siberia,Magadan (Olsky pass, 10 m). Permafrost at this site startedthawing after the IPY period at the measurement depth.Mountain permafrost in the data set is mainly represented byboreholes in the European Alps, the Nordic countries, and centralAsia. Although absolute\ue001Tvalues in mountain permafrost arehighly heterogeneous, depending on elevation, local topography,snow regime, and subsurface characteristics, changes in mountainpermafrost temperatures were analyzed for all regions andsettings19 as one group. They can vary considerably, however,between sites of low and high ground ice content at temperaturesjust below 0 \u00b0C.5579386265 7105285018548714313561113 1710287117102831abMean annual permafrost temperature (\u00b0C)\u201315\u201310\u2013501980 1986 1992 1998 2004 2010 2016265854287431 87183155528710 79 38617101025011171113356Fig. 1 Long permafrost temperature records for selected sites. aLocation ofboreholes with long time-series data. Because some regions lack longtemperature records, shorter temperature records from Greenland andChinese mountains are included for comparison. Depth of measurements isaccording to the Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost ID16: 24.4 m (ID356), 20 m (ID 55, 79, 102, 117, 501, 710, 831, 1113, and 1710), 18 m (ID 386),16.75 m (ID 871), 15 m (ID 854), 12 m (ID 287), 10 m (ID 265, 431), and 5 m(ID 528). The light blue area represents the continuous permafrost zone(>90% coverage) and the light purple area represents the discontinuouspermafrost zones (<90% coverage). bMean annual ground temperatureover time. Colors indicate the location of the boreholes in a. Permafrostzones are derived from the International Permafrost Association (IPA)map46. World Borders data are derived from http://thematicmapping.org/downloads/world_borders.php and licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/)ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-42NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:264 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08 240-4| www.nature.com/naturecommunications Mountain permafrost\ue001Tincreased20,21 by 0.19 \u00b1 0.05 \u00b0C dec\ue0011Ref .The greatest \u0394\ue001Tbsince 2008\u20132009 was 1.15 \u00b0C, observed in theAldan mountain tundra of southern Yakutia, Siberia (Taezhnoe,25 m).On average, permafrost across zones warmed by 0.33 \u00b1 0.16 \u00b0Cover the reference decade in northern Asia and by 0.23 \u00b10.11 \u00b0C dec\ue0011Ref in North America. This difference is most likelydue to stronger warming of the atmosphere over North Asiacompared to North America, as indicated by reconstructeddecadal air temperature changes (1998\u20132012) that showedcooling in Alaska22.Similar to warming of the Arctic continuous permafrost zone,the Antarctic permafrost warmed by 0.37 \u00b1 0.10 \u00b0C dec\ue0011Ref . How-ever, the remoteness of the continent and its limited accessibilityresulted in far fewer boreholes drilled to Z*compared to theNorthern Hemisphere. Consequently, permafrost temperaturedepartures and trends were statistically not signi\ufb01cant and hadlarge uncertainty bands (Fig. 3d).Air temperature changes. The relation between air and soiltemperature development in permafrost regions is not straightfor-ward due to highly variable buffer layers such as vegetation, activelayer soils, or snow cover. To compare permafrost temperaturechanges to those in the atmosphere, we applied the same calculationmethod for each borehole site using mean annual air temperatures(^T) at 2-m height above ground level (Fig. 4a, d), spatially inter-polated from the ERA Interim gridded reanalysis data set23.Wecalculated general snow thickness changes for Arctic sites in Fig. 4a,b. However, there is not, as yet, a reliable consistent data set onsnow thickness applicable for high elevation regions or Antarctica.Thepropagationoftemperaturechangeintheatmospheredownward to the depth of Z*can take up to several years, but thetime varies depending on the surface characteristics, the subsurfaceice content, and the soil thermal diffusivitiy24,25. We took this laginto account by averaging over the previous 4 years for each yearconsidered, but there was no signi\ufb01cant correlation at an annualresolution between permafrost temperature departures at Z*depthand 2-m air temperature anomalies derived from ERA Interim dataalone (Fig. 4). This lack of correlation can be attributed to thediscrepancy between the scale at which borehole observations areconducted and the spatial resolution of 80 km for the gridded air-temperature reanalysis data26 and because in permafrost regions, thereanalysis output is more dependent on the model structure anddata assimilation methods than in data-rich regions27; local micro-and secondary climate effects28; and buffering layers at the air-ground interface5that in\ufb02uence the thermal response of permafrostto short-term changes in air temperature.Previous studies have shown that these surface effects,along with the thermal diffusivity of the underlying materials,act as a buffer that reduces the effect of short-term climateacbda-b Modern permafrost temperature (mean \u00b0C of 2014\u20132016)c-d Temperature change rate of permafrost (\u00b0C per decade)Continuous permafrost Discontinuous permafrost\u201320.0\u201310.0\u20135.0\u20133.0\u20132.0\u20131.00.00.5<\u20131.6\u20131.2\u20130.8\u20130.4\u20130.10.10.40.81.2>1.6Fig. 2 Permafrost temperature and rate of change near the depth of zero annual amplitude. a,bMean annual ground temperatures for 2014\u20132016 in theNorthern Hemisphere and Antarctica, n=129 boreholes. c,dDecadal change rate of permafrost temperature from 2007 to 2016, n=123 boreholes(Eq. 3). Changes within the average measurement accuracy of ~\u00b10.1 \u00b0C are coded in green. Continuous permafrost zone (>90% coverage); discontinuouspermafrost zones (<90% coverage). Permafrost zones are derived from the International Permafrost Association (IPA) map46. World Borders data arederived from http://thematicmapping.org/downloads/world_borders.php and licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/)NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-4 ARTICLENATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:264 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08 240-4| www.nature.com/naturecommunications 3 variation2,3,5\u20137,29. Thus, short-term meteorological phenomenaare increasingly attenuated and delayed with depth, and the meanpermafrost temperature changes near the depth of Z*generallyfollow the atmosphere\u2019s long-term trend. Mean surface airtemperature changes calculated from ERA Interim data at theborehole locations (Fig. 5b) are similar to those for permafrosttemperature with respect to direction and order of magnitude.The decadal change rates of air temperature were estimated to0.86 \u00b1 0.84 \u00b0C per reference decade in the Arctic continuouspermafrost zone, 0.63 \u00b1 0.91 \u00b0C dec\ue0011Ref in the Arctic discontinuouspermafrost zone, and 0.1 \u00b1 0.50 \u00b0C dec\ue0011Ref in mountain perma-frost. Air temperature trends in Antarctica (annual mean 0.10 \u00b10.55\u00b0C dec\ue0011Ref , June\u2013August mean \u20130.48 \u00b1 0.91 \u00b0C dec\ue0011Ref ,unweighted median \u20130.12, Fig. 5b), however, do not match theobserved strong permafrost warming. This discrepancy is due tolarge climatic differences between the Antarctic Peninsula andeastern Antarctica30,31, the small number of boreholes that ful\ufb01llthe quality criteria, and the principal climate model bias inAntarctica32.Air temperature trends in the Arctic continuous permafrostzone correspond well with permafrost temperature change rates(Figs. 3a and 4a), suggesting that enhanced warming ofpermafrost in the High Arctic re\ufb02ects the polar ampli\ufb01cation ofrecent atmospheric warming22. However, in the Arctic discontin-uous permafrost zone, air temperatures were statisticallyunchanged between 2006 and 2014 while permafrost tempera-tures increased. We found that snow dynamics, the time lagbetween air and ground temperature, and the latent heat effectserve as concurrent explanations for this phenomenon.Snow thickness changes. The snow cover reduces the upwardtransfer of energy from the ground to the air during winter33,34.Distinct peaks in the mean snow depth in 2009, 2011 and from2013 onward (Fig. 4a, b) suggest that the observed continuedwarming of discontinuous permafrost is facilitated by increasingsnow thickness. Compared to the Arctic continuous permafrostzone, the mean snow cover in the discontinuous zone arrivedabout 1 week later, reached its maximum insulation 1 monthearlier, and also disappeared half a month earlier. Compared to2007\u20132009 the snow cover in 2014\u20132016 in the discontinuouszone started to form 13.7 days earlier, reached its maximuminsulation effect 37.7 days earlier, and disappeared 9.3 days earlier(Fig. 4f). It was shown previously that a difference of only 10 dayscaused signi\ufb01cant warming in Alaska35. Increases of shrub heightand density that trap wind drifting snow is likely also aSites602008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016300Temperature change (\u00b0C)a0.6\u20130.200.20.4Arctic continuous permafrost2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016d0.6\u20130.200.20.4Antarctic permafrost1005Sites502008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016250Temperature change (\u00b0C)c0.6\u20130.200.20.4Mountain permafrost2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 201620400b0.6\u20130.200.20.4Arctic discontinuous permafrostFig. 3 Annual permafrost temperature change. a\u2013dPermafrost temperature departure \u0394\ue001Ty;bcalculated from mean annual ground temperatures inboreholes near the depth of zero annual amplitude Z*relative to the 2008\u20132009 reference period. Mean values calculated as de-clustered, indexed area-weighted averages (Eq. 1). Temperature uncertainties are expressed at 95% con\ufb01dence. Sample size shown is the number of borehole sites per year andregionARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-44NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:264 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08 240-4| www.nature.com/naturecommunications contributing factor36. All of these changes provide evidence ofincreased protection of the ground from low temperatures duringwinter37,38. Snow timing differences within the continuous zoneare less distinct but show a generally similar trend (Fig. 4e, f).DiscussionAn important factor that explains the general discrepancybetween mean annual temperature changes at Z*in permafrostand the atmosphere is that permafrost progressively with depth\u201cremembers\u201dthe surface temperature history of the past severalyears25,39. The temporal dimension of episodes with lower airtemperatures between 2009 and 2013 in the Arctic (Fig. 4a, b),and around 2012 in the mountains (Fig. 4c), relative to precedingperiod of higher air temperatures, however, was not large enoughto sustainably impact the general warming trend of permafrost.We partly attribute the difference in ground temperaturechange between the continuous permafrost and the discontinuouspermafrost zones to the latent heat effect. In this process, the ice-water phase change associated with warmer permafrost in the2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016Air temperature change (\u00b0C)snow depth change (cm 10\u20131)aAir 2 m above arctic continuous permafrost aArctic continuous permafrost zone2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016dAntarctic permafrost area\u20131.001.02.0Air temperature change (\u00b0C)2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016cMountain permafrost area\u20131.001.02.02000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016\u20131.001.02.0 bArctic discontinuous permafrost zone\u20131.001.02.0AirSnowdepthAirSnowdepthAirAirn = 6n = 53 n = 36n = 282000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016Snow onset, insulation maximum, and ending AprNovDecJanFebMarJulMayJun2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016fArctic discontinuous permafrost zoneAprNovDecJann = 36FebMarn = 53SIM/50 cmSO/6 cmSIM/50 cmSO/6 cmJulMayJuneArctic continuous permafrost zoneSE/1 cmSE/1 cmFig. 4 Annual air temperature and snow depth changes. a\u2013dAir temperature anomaly \u0394^Ty;brelative to the 1981\u20132010 reference period calculated frommean annual air temperatures at 2-m height above the ground level interpolated from the ERA Interim reanalysis data set. Mean values calculated as de-clustered, indexed area-weighted averages (Eq. 4). Dark colored dashed lines indicate 4-year end-point running means. Snow depth changes \u0394^Sy;bin aandb, indicated in gray, calculated as the difference relative to the 1999\u20132010 reference period from the CMC reanalysis data set (eq. 5). e,fOnset of snowSO, snow insulation maximum SIM (dashed line), and the end of snow melt SE. Uncertainties are expressed as shading at 95% con\ufb01dence. Sample size nindicates the number of boreholesNATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-4 ARTICLENATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:264 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08 240-4| www.nature.com/naturecommunications 5 discontinuous zone (Fig. 2a, b) reduces the response of groundtemperature to changes in air temperature4. Cold permafrosttherefore exhibits a greater response to changing air temperaturecompared to permafrost with a temperature close to 0 \u00b0C4,40.The warming of permafrost observed since IPY continues thetrends documented prior to IPY41. Our global analysis suggeststhat the future increases in air temperature projected undercurrent climate scenarios42 will result in continued permafrostwarming. The duration of our time-series, however, does not yetpermit predictive analysis of non-linear climate-permafrost rela-tions as the latent heat effect is stronger near 0 \u00b0C and surfacecharacteristics are not constant. However, observations of thaw atsome of the observation sites demonstrate that the latent heatrequirement cannot inde\ufb01nitely delay permafrost warming downto depths of about 15 m observed in this study (Fig. 6), norprevent the eventual thawing of permafrost. This could have wideimplications in terms of permafrost degradation and release ofgreenhouse gases from decomposition of organic matter.The SWIPA 2017 report41 gave an estimate of 0.5 \u00b0C warmingof permafrost in very cold areas such as the High Arctic since IPY(2007\u20132009). This is similar to our network observations ofstrong warming within the Arctic continuous permafrost zoneand of continued warming elsewhere. The assessment of per-mafrost temperature trends presented in this paper can facilitatevalidation of models to project thawing of permafrost down to thedepth of Z*and associated impacts with respect to feedbacks tothe climate system.The current global coverage of permafrost temperature mon-itoring is not yet ideal, due to the limited sampling in regionssuch as Siberia, central Canada, Antarctica, and the Himalayanand Andes mountains. Furthermore, even though the data usedwere quality checked and are as complete as possible, logisticalchallenges during \ufb01eldwork caused gaps in the time series. Betterassessments of the evolution of the thermal state of permafrost,including consideration of non-linear system behavior, will ben-e\ufb01t from ongoing efforts to enhance the global network spatiallyand extend the length of the record. Enhancing existing mon-itoring sites through co-location with meteorological stationscould further improve understanding of microclimate and buffer-layer in\ufb02uences, and would also provide the data necessary for acomprehensive assessment of permafrost responses to ongoingclimate change.The newly compiled GTN-P data set has facilitated assessmentof trends in permafrost temperatures and can also contribute toimproved representation of permafrost dynamics in climatemodels and the reduction of uncertainty in the prediction offuture conditions.MethodsField observations of permafrost temperatures. Boreholes were established andtemperatures were recorded during annually repeated \ufb01eldwork campaigns in polarand high-elevation areas. Temperature was measured either by lowering a cali-brated thermistor into a borehole, or recorded using permanently installed multi-sensor cables43. Measurements were recorded either manually with a portabletemperature system or by automated continuous data logging. At some boreholesites, permafrost thawed at the measurement depth during the period of obser-vations. The criterion to include non-permafrost sites in the global change calcu-lation was that ground temperatures near the depth of the Z*were below 0 \u00b0C untilthe end of the IPY reference period in 2009.ACPn = 53ADPn = 36MPn = 28ANPn = 6Temperature difference (\u00b0C)\u22120.501\u22121012baPermafrostAir0.5***Fig. 5 Decadal temperature change rates at permafrost borehole sites.aBoxplots showing the regional (unweighted) distribution of permafrosttemperature change rates near the depth of zero annual amplitude Z*calculated for 2007\u20132016 in \u00b0C per decade (Eq. 3). * indicate signi\ufb01cantdifference to 0, p< 0.05 de\ufb01ned by the Wilcoxon Signed-Rank test. pvaluesACP: 0.000, ADP: 0.002, MP: 0.016, and ANP: 0.156 (rounded to threedigits). The Kruskal\u2013Wallis test indicated pvalues > 0.05 for couples thatare tied with brackets in the graph. bAir temperature change rates at 2 mheight above ground at borehole sites in \u00b0C per decade, calculated from theERA Interim reanalysis data for 2004\u20132016, separated by regions. Symbols:nnumber of boreholes, ACP Arctic continuous permafrost, ADP Arcticdiscontinuous permafrost, MP mountain permafrost, ANP Antarcticpermafrost. Boxes represent 25\u201375% quartiles and whiskers are 1.5interquartile ranges from the median. Medians are shown as black lines302010ab1512Depth (m)Sensorsn = 154Z*n = 91\u201310+1T difference (\u00b0C dec\u20131)\u226412 mn = 51>12 mn = 72**Fig. 6 Depth distribution of borehole temperatures. aBoxplots showing thedepth distribution of temperature measurements (sensor depths) and ofthe zero annual amplitude Z*in the boreholes. bTemperature distributionin borehole sensors that are shallower (\u226412 m) and deeper (>12 m) thanthe median of Z*. * indicate signi\ufb01cant difference to 0, p< 0.05 de\ufb01ned bythe Wilcoxon Signed-Rank test; pvalues \u226412 m: 0.000, >12 m: 0.000(rounded to three digits). The Kruskal\u2013Wallis test between these zones(b) resulted in p=0.908, indicating that the zones are not signi\ufb01cantlydifferent to each other. Boxplots represent 25\u201375% quartiles and whiskersare 1.5 interquartile ranges from the median. Medians are shown as blacklines and labeled with values. The number of boreholes (sensors), and thenumber of available Z*values is indicated by nARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-46NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:264 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08 240-4| www.nature.com/naturecommunications Compiling permafrost temperature data. Permafrost temperature data areassembled in the Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost (GTN-P) Database16.They are then transferred to a global data set after a 1-year embargo to allowauthors to publish their local \ufb01ndings \ufb01rst. Within the GTN-P Data ManagementSystem the data presented were harmonized, quality checked and \ufb01ltered to gen-erate a standardized global permafrost borehole data set. Data standardization wasperformed during data entry into the database following international geospatialmetadata standards ISO 19115/2 and TC/221. The data management system isbased on an object-oriented data model, accessible online at http://gtnpdatabase.org. The GTN-P mean annual ground temperature\ue001Tcompilation is accessibleonline at https://doi.org/10.1594/PANGAEA.884711.A total of 154 boreholes with 1264\ue001Tvalues were used in this study. Dataanalyses of decadal permafrost temperature change were based on 123 boreholesand 1033\ue001Tvalues calculated from > 105sensor observations.Calculating permafrost temperature change. We used the R environment44 tocalculate the mean permafrost temperature change for every borehole from quality-\ufb01ltered\ue001Tdata. The same measurement depth was used each year for a borehole.The depth was chosen to be the nearest available sensor to the depth of Z*, thedepth at which seasonal changes in temperature are \u22640.1 \u00b0C (Fig. 7). The nearestdepth to Z*was detected by either an algorithm calculating the difference betweenannual maximum (summer) and minimum (winter) temperature in the originaldata starting from the shallowest depth downwards and using cubic spline inter-polation between thermistors and a threshold set to sensor accuracy, or by visualinspection of annual maximum and minimum temperature measurements plottedversus depth (Fig. 7). Because the depth of Z*varies over time as temperaturechanges, we used an average estimated for the observation period. The datarevealed that 19.5% of measurements were from above Z*. 59.8% of measurementsrepresented Z*and 20.7% were from below Z*. Measurements from boreholes thathad no reliable indication of Z*had a mean depth of 17.1 m, which is well belowthe average of all indicated Z*values (mean 14.1 m, median 12 m). Thus, the datadistribution represents an approximation to Z*which minimizes the potential biascaused by seasonal \ufb02uctuations.We created a data set that re\ufb02ects long-term climate change and avoids largetemperature \ufb02uctuations caused by seasonal phenomena, e.g., in Antarctica, byexcluding data from shallow boreholes that did not reach Z*. Because Z*could notbe determined in all boreholes the minimum depth was set to 10 m. However, \ufb01veboreholes with depths between 6.7 m and 10 m were included (GTN-P ID\u2019s16: 137,860, 861, 877, and 1192), because their depths were equal to Z*, and seasonal\ufb02uctuations were less than the instrument precision and accuracy. Boreholes thatful\ufb01lled the quality criteria but were not included in this analysis due to depthconstraints, represented 22.6% of the original data set. 8.6% were excluded from theArctic continuous data set; 23.4% from the Arctic discontinuous data set; 30.0%from the mountain data set; and 57.1% from the Antarctic data set. Statisticallyindifferent temperature trends of the remaining shallow (\u226412 m) and deeper(>12 m, max. 40 m) boreholes in the utilized data set con\ufb01rm that the observeddepths near Z*(Fig. 6b) provide a representative sample tracking climate variabilitycoherently.We applied different methods to extract information on permafrosttemperature changes in single years, in single boreholes and for decadal changes inthe permafrost regions, described as follows: We de\ufb01ne a set i={2007,...,2016} toidentify the years. To identify the boreholes b we use the GTN-P Database ID.Continuous (full-year) records started at a large number of borehole sites in 2008,the second year of the 4th International Polar Year (IPY). To base the referenceperiod for the annual departure calculation on the largest possible number ofboreholes we exclude 2007 and estimate the annual differences in\ue001Tin year y2iand borehole b as\u0394\ue001Ty;b\u00bc\ue001Ty;b\ue0011=2\ue001T2008;b\u00fe\ue001T2009;b\ue001\ue003 \u00f01\u00deThe last term on the right-hand side of Eq. (1) serves as our mean value for thereference period. We compare this reference period to the latest available meanvalue period and calculate\u0394\ue001Tbto rank total temperature differences amongboreholes.\u0394\ue001Tb\u00bc1=2\ue001T2015;b\u00fe\ue001T2016;b\ue001\ue003\ue0011=2\ue001T2008;b\u00fe\ue001T2009;b\ue001\ue003\u00f02\u00deEquations (1) and (2) require data to be available in each of the observation years.To calculate the rate of temperature change per decade we follow a thirdapproach using the primary mean annual ground temperature data set\ue001Tbfor allavailable years in iand perform linear regression, according to the followingattribution of our data in the regression equation:\ue001Tregb\u00bcab\u00fecbx\u00f03\u00dewhere\ue001Tregbis the regression estimate of\ue001Tb,abis the vertical intercept (the startingtemperature in a borehole), cbis the slope of the regression line, and xis the rangeof years involved.The requirement to perform linear regression on b was that iincluded at leastone value yin the IPY period (2007, 2008, or 2009), one value in the modernreference period (2015 or 2016) and a minimum of \ufb01ve values in total. Wecalculated the rate of temperature change in each borehole as the slope of the linearregression cbusing the linear model function (lm) in the R environment. Togenerate decadal change values, we extrapolated 37.7% of the borehole data in theArctic continuous zone, 47.3% in the Arctic discontinuous zone, 29.3% in themountain zone and 100% in Antarctica for 1\u20133 years.The consistency of temperature time series in boreholes depends on sustaineddata collection at remote sites. At some boreholes, instrumentation was destroyed,damaged or malfunctioned leading to interruptions in data collection45. To avoidbroken data runs affecting the annual means, measurements at frequencies greaterthan monthly (e.g. daily or hourly), were aggregated to monthly means beforecalculating annual means. Mean annual values were based on at least monthlyprimary data. Data points based on fewer than one measurement every month wereallowed only if the sensor depth was equal to or below the depth of zero annualamplitude. Annual means were calculated from original measurements as calendar-year means in the GTN-P Database. Meteorological years in permafrost areasdepend on the onset and termination of the freezing and thaw periods, and inprevious studies varied spatially. We therefore indicated the starting month of theperiod in the data set. Mean values contain only the available valid\ue001Tdata in eachyear, and thus the number of borehole temperatures included in change-ratecalculations varies between years.To evaluate temperature changes in the Arctic continuous and discontinuouspermafrost zones, in the mountain permafrost and in permafrost in Antarctica, weapplied a spatial de-clustering prior to calculating mean values of temperaturechanges from the boreholes. The spatial de-clustering reduces the bias in thecalculation of means caused by an inhomogeneous (clustered) spatial distributionof the boreholes. We grouped the boreholes into ten world zones (Fig. 8) andde\ufb01ned the areas underlain by permafrost by correlating the boreholes with theInternational Permafrost Association (IPA) permafrost zones46. Arctic continuouspermafrost represents the mean of four different zones: Arctic continuouspermafrost West (2.41 \u00d7 106km2), Arctic continuous permafrost West islands(1.57 \u00d7 106km2), Arctic continuou s permafrost Europe (0.22 \u00d7 106km2), andArctic continuous permafrost East (Asia) (6.62 \u00d7 106km2). Arctic discontinuouspermafrost is averaged over three zones: Arctic discontinuous permafrost West(3.91 \u00d7 106km2), Arctic discontinuou s permafrost East (Asia) (3.86 \u00d7 106km2),and Arctic discontinuou s permafrost Europe (0.28 \u00d7 106km2). Mountainpermafrost is averaged over two zones: Chinese mountains (2.07 \u00d7 106km2), andOther mountains (2.33 \u00d7 106km2) including the Alps and other sites with highelevations >1000 m a.s.l. such as in Scandina via and the North AmericanCordillera. Antarctica is treated as one zone (0.05 \u00d7 106km26,47). For comparingtemperature trends between North American and north Asian permafrost wede\ufb01ne two separate data sets by excluding southern, European, and central Asianboreholes. Within the zones, clusters of boreholes close together were groupedwhen the sum of longitude and latitude differences were <0.1 decimal degree andthe\ue001Tvalues of adjacent boreholes were averaged before calculating the meantemperature change.To estimate the mean annual temperature change in each zone we applied area-weighted arithmetic averaging of\ue001Tvalues in boreholes. To preserve the signal of localoutlier trends showing atypical temperature change directions and magnitudes (e.g.,in parts of Antarctica and in Qu\u00e9bec, Canada), we did not use medians. To suppressnear-surface and geothermal changes indices of boreholes were distributed as threepossible integers to multiply the sites before averaging, according to the followingcriteria: (i)\ue001Tis available in each year of the reference periods indicated in Eqs. (1)and(2), and (ii)\ue001Tdepth is equal to the depth of Z*and >10 m (few exceptions were madeaccording to the depth of Z*as described above).Winter SummerZero annual amplitude Z*PermafrostActive layerNon-cryoticDepthTemperature (\u00b0C)0\u2013+TFig. 7 Thermal regime of permafrost. Schematic showing the maximum(red line) and minimum ground temperature (blue line) during the year,and their convergence to give the mean annual ground temperature\ue001Tat thedepth of zero annual amplitude Z*. Black dots show the schematic meantemperature for permafrost soils. Compiled guided by French53NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-4 ARTICLENATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:264 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08 240-4| www.nature.com/naturecommunications 7 Calculating air temperature change. The set of air temperature data monitored atborehole sites is incomplete. To develop data comparable to the permafrost tem-perature data, we calculated mean annual air temperatures (^T) from ERA Interim2 m air temperature data set with 80 km spatial resolution. We derived the rea-nalysis time series for each borehole from linear interpolation of the four nearestgrid points surrounding the borehole coordinates. Mean annual values were cal-culated from December until November. Given, that the propagation of atmo-spheric temperature change downward to the depth of Z*takes up to severalyears25,37, depending on the local thermal diffusivity24, we extended the time seriesshown in Fig. 4backwards to 2000 and used the standard reference period1981\u20132010 to estimate anomalies.We de\ufb01ne a set j={1981,...,2016} to identify the years being considered. We usethe coordinates of boreholes bde\ufb01ned in Eq. (1) and calculate the annual differencefor speci\ufb01cyearsy2jin^Tas\u0394^Ty;b\u00bc^Ty;b\ue001130 X2010j\u00bc1981^Tj;b\u00f04\u00deBased on the average propagation of surface temperature towards Z*of 4 years25 wecalculated 4-year end-point running means to compare air temperature withpermafrost temperature changes. To calculate the rate of temperature change over adecade, we apply linear regression on^Ty;bfor all y2jusing the linear model functionin the R environment and the slope of the linear regression in an annual arraybetween 2004 and 2016 and multiplied the annual change rates by 10. Data analysesof air temperature change were based on 137 borehole sites and 4932^Tvalues.Calculating snow thickness change. We calculated the mean annual snowthickness (^S) for the Arctic continuous and the discontinuous permafrost zonefrom the Canadian Meteorological Centre (CMC) daily snow depth analysis datawith 24 km spatial resolution48. We derived the reanalysis time series for eachborehole from linear interpolation of the four nearest grid points surrounding theborehole coordinates. Mean values were calculated from December until Februaryfor each year in the data set. To identify winters we use subsequent years, e.g. in thetime series we assign the 1999\u20132000 winter to 2000.Given that 1999 is the earliest available year in the data set we de\ufb01ne a set k={1999,...,2016} to identify the winter years, where y2k. We use the coordinates ofboreholes b de\ufb01ned in Eq. (1) and calculate the annual difference in^Sas\u0394^Sy;b\u00bc^Sy;b\ue001112 X2010k\u00bc1999^Sk;b\u00f05\u00deThe onset snow has an impact on the ground thermal regime. To assess the onsetof snow cover, we assemble a set of snow depths dates at daily resolution between 1September and 30 April in a set of days l={1,2,3,...,242} for every year in k. In leapyears l={1,2,3,...,243}. To calculate the onset date of snow SO we use the \ufb01rst daydSOk;breaching 6 cm in lfor which the following 5 days, adding up to a synoptic timescale of 6 days, retain a daily snow cover of at least 6 cm49.The insulation maximum of snow SIM is reached when the snow coveraccumulated to a thickness between 40 and 50 cm33,37. Accordingly, we set SIMbased on the \ufb01rst day dSIMk;bin lreaching 50 cm, or, if it is not reached, take the dayrepresenting the maximum snow cover in l(below 50 cm).To assess the end of snow cover SE, we assemble the snow depth dates at dailyresolution between 1 September and 30 August in a set m={1,2,3,...,365} for everyyear in k. In leap years m={1,2,3,...,366}. To calculate SE we use the \ufb01rst day dSEk;binmreaching down to less than 1 cm after a decreasin g gradient of at least 8 cm over6 days, or, if this gradient is not reached, the \ufb01rst day of at least 6 subsequent snowfree (<1 cm) days.Measurement accuracy. The reported measurement accuracy of our temperatureobservations, including manual and automated logging systems, varied from \u00b10.01to \u00b10.25 \u00b0C with a mean of \u00b10.08 \u00b0C. Previous tests have shown the comparabilityof different measurement techniques to have an overall accuracy of \u00b10.1 \u00b0C3.Thermistors are the most commonly used sensors for borehole measurements.Their accuracy depends on (1) the materials and process used to construct thethermistor, (2) the circuitry used to measure the thermistor resistance, (3) thecalibration and equation used to convert measured resistance to temperature, and(4) the aging and resulting drift of the sensor over time. Thermistors are typicallycalibrated to correct for variations due to (1) and (2). About 20% of the boreholesare visited once per year and measured at or below Z*using single thermistors anda data logger. In this case the system is routinely validated in an ice-bath allowingcorrection for any calibration drift. The accuracy of an ice-bath is ~\u00b1 0.01 \u00b0C50.Using the offset determined during this validation to correct the data greatlyincreases the measurement accuracy near 0 \u00b0C, an important reference point forpermafrost. The remaining systems are permanently installed and typically ice-bathcalibrated at 0 \u00b0C before deployment. The calibration drift is dif\ufb01cult to quantify asthermistor chains are not frequently removed for re-calibration or validation. Inmany cases removal of thermistor chains becomes impossible some time afterdeployment, e.g. because of borehole shearing.The drift rate among bead thermistors from different manufacturers was <0.01 \u00b0C per year during a 2 year experiment at 0, 30, and 60 \u00b0C51. The calibration drift ofglass bead thermistors was found to be 0.01 mK per year52, at an ambienttemperature of 20 \u00b0C. A single drifting thermistor in a chain is detectable throughits anomalous temporal trend. Such data were excluded from our data set. Theabsolute accuracy of borehole temperature measurements, in terms of theirrepresentativeness of the temperature distribution in undisturbed soil, also dependson the depth accuracy of the sensors\u2019positions in the borehole. This study isconcerned with temperatures at Z*, where temperature gradients are typically small(<0.1 \u00b0C m\u22121). Consequently, mm-level positioning accuracy does not signi\ufb01cantlyimpact measurement accuracy. Finally, as this study is concerned with annualaverages, adequate chronometry is ensured.The above discussion of accuracy relates to the absolute temperature valuesmeasured, but the detection of temperature change is more accurate because errorsin calibration offset have no impact, sensor nonlinearities are generally small andnot of concern. We therefore consider <0.1 \u00b0C a conservative average estimate ofthe accuracy of temperature change on an individual sensor basis.Con\ufb01dence intervals and statistical signi\ufb01cance. Permafrost and air tempera-ture departure from 2008 until 2016 (\u0394\ue001Ti;band \u0394^Ty;b) and the regression from2007 until 2016 of each borehole were used to calculate the 95% con\ufb01denceintervals within each world zone using a Student t-test in the R environment (52%p< 0.05, 48% p> 0.05, mean |t|=3.4). The upper and lower con\ufb01dence boundariesAntarcticaArctic continuous EArctic discontinuous EArctic continuous EurArctic discontinuous EurMountains ChinaMountains otherArctic continuous W Arctic discontinuous WArctic continuous W islandsContinuousDiscontinuousFactor 1Factor 2Factor 3Permafrost zoneBorehole weightingBorehole groupingbaFig. 8 Weighting and grouping of boreholes. Map showing the indices andzoning of boreholes prior to area-weighting and calculation of meantemperature changes. aNorthern Hemisphere. bAntarctica. Permafrostzones are derived from the International Permafrost Association (IPA)map46. World Borders data are derived from http://thematicmapping.org/downloads/world_borders.php and licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/)ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-48NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:264 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08 240-4| www.nature.com/naturecommunications were calculated from de-clustered and indexed boreholes. Mean con\ufb01denceintervals for composite permafrost zones (global, Arctic continuous, Arctic dis-continuous, mountain, Asian and American) were area-weighted. Antarcticaconsists of one zone and thus area-weighting is not applicable. Given a non-normal, unimodal, and only slightly skewed distribution of data in similarly shapedsubsets (regions) gained by eq. 3(Figs. 5,6), we performed a Wilcoxon Signed-Rank test and a Kruskal\u2013Wallis test to assess the signi\ufb01cance of the difference tozero and the differences between medians, respectively. To consider false positives,we performed a False Discovery Rate adjustment of the p-values, resulting in 43.3%p< 0.05, 56.6% p> 0.05, median 0.08 in a data matrix of 9 years (eq. 1) versus 10permafrost world zones indicated in Fig. 8. Boxplots represent 25\u201375% quartilesand whiskers are 1.5 interquartile ranges from the median.Data availabilityThe GTN-P global mean annual ground temperature data for permafrost near thedepth of zero annual amplitude (2007\u20132016) is accessible online at https://doi.org/10.1594/PANGAEA.884711.Received: 5 January 2018 Accepted: 21 December 2018References1. Gruber, S. Derivation and analysis of a high-resolution estimate of globalpermafrost zonation. Cryosphere 6, 221\u2013233 (2012).2. Christiansen, H. H. et al. The thermal state of permafrost in the Nordic Areaduring the International Polar Year 2007-2009. Permafrost Periglac. Process.21, 156\u2013181 (2010).3. Romanovsky, V. E. et al. Thermal state of permafrost in Russia. PermafrostPeriglac. Process. 21, 136\u2013155 (2010).4. Romanovsky, V. E., Smith, S. L. & Christiansen, H. H. Permafrost thermalstate in the Polar Northern Hemisphere during the international polar year2007-2009: a synthesis. Permafrost Periglac. Process. 21, 106\u2013116 (2010).5. Smith, S. L. et al. Thermal state of permafrost in North America: acontribution to the international polar year. Permafrost Periglac. Process. 21,117\u2013135 (2010).6. Vieira, G. et al. Thermal state of permafrost and active-layer monitoring in theantarctic: advances during the international polar year 2007\u20132009. PermafrostPeriglac. Process. 21, 182\u2013197 (2010).7. Zhao, L., Wu, Q., Marchenko, S. S. & Sharkhuu, N. Thermal state ofpermafrost and active layer in central asia during the international polar year.Permafrost Periglac. Process. 21, 198\u2013207 (2010).8. Pepin, N. et al. Elevation-dependent warming in mountain regions of theworld. Nat. Clim. Change 5, 424\u2013430 (2015).9. Chadburn, S. E. et al. An observation-based constraint on permafrost loss as afunction of global warming. Nat. Clim. Change 7, 340\u2013344 (2017).10. Larsen, J. N. & Fondahl, G. Arctic human development report: regionalprocesses and global linkages (Nordic Council of Ministers, 2015).11. Hjort, J. et al. Degrading permafrost puts Arctic infrastructure at risk by mid-century. Nat. Commun. 9, 5147 (2018).12. Haeberli, W., Schaub, Y. & Huggel, C. Increasing risks related to landslidesfrom degrading permafrost into new lakes in de-glaciating mountain ranges.Geomorphology 293, 405\u2013417 (2017).13. Bowden, W. B. Climate change in the arctic \u2013permafrost, thermokarst, andwhy they matter to the Non-Arctic world. Geogr. Compass 4, 1553\u20131566(2010).14. Schaefer, K., Lantuit, H., Romanovsky, V. E., Schuur, E. A. & Witt, R. Theimpact of the permafrost carbon feedback on global climate. Environ. Res.Lett. 9, 9 (2014).15. Schuur, E. A. G. et al. Climate change and the permafrost carbon feedback.Nature 520, 171\u2013179 (2015).16. Biskaborn, B. K. et al. The new database of the Global Terrestrial Network forPermafrost (GTN-P). Earth Syst. Sci. Data 7, 245\u2013259 (2015).17. Serreze, M. C. et al. Observational evidence of recent change in the northernhigh-latitude environment. Clim. Change 46, 159\u2013207 (2000).18. Harris, C. et al. Warming permafrost in European mountains. Glob. Planet.Change 39, 215\u2013225 (2003).19. Harris, C. et al. Permafrost and climate in Europe: monitoring and modellingthermal, geomorphological and geotechnical responses. Earth-Sci. Rev. 92,117\u2013171 (2009).20. Streletskiy, D. et al. Permafrost thermal state. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc.98,19\u201321 (2017).21. Liu, G. et al. Permafrost warming in the context of step-wise climate change inthe tien shan mountains, China. Permafrost Periglac. Process. 28, 130\u2013139(2017).22. Huang, J. et al. Recently ampli\ufb01ed arctic warming has contributed to acontinual global warming trend. Nat. Clim. Change 7, 875\u2013879 (2017).23. Dee, D. P. et al. The ERA-Interim reanalysis: con\ufb01guration and performanceof the data assimilation system. Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 137, 553\u2013597 (2011).24. Kusuda, T. & Achenbach, P. R. Earth temperature and thermal diffusivity atselected stations in the United States (National Bureau of Standards. GaithersburgMD, 1965).25. Lachenbruch, A. H. & Marshall, B. V. Changing climate: geothermal evidencefrom permafrost in the Alaskan Arctic. Science 234, 689\u2013696 (1986).26. Fiddes, J. & Gruber, S. TopoSCALE v. 1.0: downscaling gridded climate data incomplex terrain. Geosci. Model Dev. 7, 387\u2013405 (2014).27. Lindsay, R., Wensnahan, M., Schweiger, A. & Zhang, J. Evaluation of sevendifferent atmospheric reanalysis products in the Arctic. J. Clim. 27, 2588\u20132606(2014).28. Biskaborn, B. K. et al. Late Quaternary vegetation and lake system dynamics innorth-eastern Siberia: implications for seasonal climate variability. Quat. Sci.Rev. 147, 406\u2013421 (2016).29. Gubler, S., Fiddes, J., Keller, M. & Gruber, S. Scale-dependent measurementand analysis of ground surface temperature variability in alpine terrain.Cryosphere 5, 431\u2013443 (2011).30. Turner, J. et al. Absence of 21st century warming on Antarctic Peninsulaconsistent with natural variability. Nature 535, 411\u2013415 (2016).31. Oliva, M. et al. Recent regional climate cooling on the Antarctic Peninsulaand associated impacts on the cryosphere. Sci. Total Environ. 580, 210\u2013223(2017).32. Jones, P. D. & Lister, D. H. Antarctic near\u2010surface air temperaturescompared with ERA\u2010Interim values since 1979. Int. J. Climatol. 35, 1354\u20131366(2015).33. Park, H., Fedorov, A. N., Zheleznyak, M. N., Konstantinov, P. Y. & Walsh, J.E. Effect of snow cover on pan-Arctic permafrost thermal regimes. Clim.Dynam. 44, 2873\u20132895 (2015).34. Park, H., Sherstiukov, A. B., Fedorov, A. N., Polyakov, I. V. & Walsh, J. E. Anobservation-based assessment of the in\ufb02uences of air temperature and snowdepth on soil temperature in Russia. Environ. Res. Lett. 9,https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/9/6/064026 (2014).35. Ling, F. & Zhang, T. J. Impact of the timing and duration of seasonal snowcover on the active layer and permafrost in the Alaskan Arctic. PermafrostPeriglac. Process. 14, 141\u2013150 (2003).36. Paradis, M., Levesque, E. & Boudreau, S. Greater effect of increasing shrubheight on winter versus summer soil temperature. Environ. Res. Lett. 11,https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/11/8/085005 (2016).37. Zhang, T. J. In\ufb02uence of the seasonal snow cover on the ground thermalregime: an overview. Rev. Geophys. 43,https://doi.org/10.1029/2004rg000157(2005).38. Burn, C. R. & Zhang, Y. Permafrost andclimate change at Herschel Island(Qikiqtaruq), Yukon Territory, Canada. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos. 114,https://doi.org/10.1029/2008jf001087 (2009).39. Zhang, Y., Chen, W. J. & Riseborough, D. W. Temporal and spatial changes ofpermafrost in Canada since the end of the Little Ice Age. J. Geophys. Res.Atmos. 111,https://doi.org/10.1029/2006jd007284 (2006).40. James, M., Lewkowicz, A. G., Smith, S. L. & Miceli, C. M. Multi-decadaldegradation and persistence of permafrost in the Alaska Highway corridor,northwest Canada. Environ. Res. Lett. 8,https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/8/4/045013 (2013).41. Romanovsky, V. et al. in Snow, Water, Ice and Permafrost in the Arctic(SWIPA) 65-102 (Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme, 2017).42. Raftery, A. E., Zimmer, A., Frierson, D. M. W., Startz, R. & Liu, P. R.Less than 2\u00b0 C warming by 2100 unlikely. Nat. Clim. Change 7, 637\u2013641(2017).43. Streletskiy, D et al. Strategy and Implementation Plan 2016-2020 for the GlobalTerrestrial Network for Permafrost (GTN-P). (The George WashingtonUniversity, Washington D.C., 2017).44. R Development Core Team. R: A language and environment for statisticalcomputing. (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, 2012).45. Luethi, R. & Phillips, M. Challenges and solutions for long-term permafrostborehole temperature monitoring and data interpretation. Geogr. Helv. 71,121\u2013131 (2016).46. Brown, J., Ferrians, O. J. J., Heginbottom, J. A. & Melnikov, E. S. Circum-Arctic Map of Permafrost and Ground-Ice Conditions (National Snow and IceData Center, 1998).47. Bockheim, J., Campbell, I., Guglielmin, M. & L\u00f3pez-Mart\u0131nez, J. in Proc.9th International Conference on Permafrost 125\u2013130 (University of Alaska, 2008).48. Brown, R. D. & Brasnett, B. Canadian Meteorological Centre (CMC) DailySnow Depth Analysis Data (NASA National Snow and Ice Data CenterDistributed Active Archive Center, 2010).49. Roesch, A., Wild, M., Gilgen, H. & Ohmura, A. A new snow coverfraction parametrization for the ECHAM4 GCM. Clim. Dynam. 17, 933\u2013946(2001).NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-4 ARTICLENATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:264 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08 240-4| www.nature.com/naturecommunications 9 50. Wise, J. Liquid-in-glass Thermometer Calibration Service (National Inst. ofStandards and Technology - Temperature and Pressure Div., 1988).51. Wood, S. D., Mangum, B. W., Filliben, J. J. & Tillett, S. B. An investigationof the stability of thermistors. J. Res. Natl Bur. Stand. (1934). 83, 247\u2013263(1978).52. Lawton, K. M. & Patterson, S. R. Long-term relative stability of thermistors:Part 2. Precis Eng. 26, 340\u2013345 (2002).53. French, H. M. The Periglacial Environment 3rd edn (John Wiley & Sons. Ltd.,2007).AcknowledgementsThis research would not have been possible without the long-term commitment ofall observers to site maintenance, data collection, and their willingness to sharepermafrost borehole data. All data were compiled by the Global Terrestrial Networkfor Permafrost (GTN-P). We thank the International Permafrost Association for\ufb01nancial support. We thank Jerry Brown for initiating the borehole metadata col-lection and Christina Roolfs for mathematical review. This research was supportedby grants from (in alphabetical order) AGAUR ANTALP #2017-SGR-1102 (Catalo-nia); BMBF PALMOD #01LP1510D (Germany); ERC PETA-CARB #338335 (EU);FCT #PERMANTAR2017-18/PROPOLAR (Portugal); Formas #214-2014-562 (Swe-den); HGF COPER #VH-NG-801 (Germany); Horizon 2020 Nunataryuk #773421(EU); JSPS KAKENHI #25350416, #21310001 (Japan); MESC #RFMEFI58718X0048,#14.587.21.0048-SODEEP (Russia); MeteoSwiss in the framework of GCOS Switzer-land, FOEN and SCNAT for the Swiss Permafrost Monitoring Network PERMOS(Switzerland); Natural Resources Canada; NNSF #41690144, #41671060 (China);NRC TSP #176033/S30, #157837/V30, #176033/S30, #185987/V30 (Norway);NSERC #2014-04084, #2015-05411 (Canada); NSF OPP #1304271, #1304555#1836377; ICER #1558389, #1717770 (USA); PNRA #16_00194 (Italy); Ramon y Cajal#RYC-2015-17597 (Spain); RAS PP #15, #51, #55, GP #AAAA-A18-118022190065-1,#18-218012490093-1 (Russia); RFBR #18-05-60004, #18-55-11003, #16-05-00249,#16-45-890257-YaNAO, #18-55-11005 AF_t(ClimEco), #18-05-60222-Arctica (Rus-sia); RSCF #16-17-00102 (Russia); National Research Foundation, SNA#14070874451 (South Africa).Author contributionsThe study was initially conceived during a GTN-P workshop in 2015. B.K.B. led theanalyses and writing of the manuscript. S.L.S., J.N., H.M., G.V., D.S., P.S., V.E.R. andA.G.L. are principal co-authors. A.A., M.A., J.B., W.L.C., H.H.C., B.D., R.D., D.D., B.E.,G.G., M.G., T.I.-N., K.I., M.I., M.J., D.K., A.K., P.K., H.L., C.L., D.L., G.M., I.M., N.M., M.O., M.P., M.R., A.B.K.S., D.S., C.S., P.S., A.V., Q.W., K.Y. and M.Z. contributed with datacollection and expert assessment of borehole data. H.J., A.J., T.K. and J.-P.L. performeddatabase coding, data processing, and data analyses. All authors contributed to analysis ofthe results and revision of the manuscript.Additional informationSupplementary Information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-4.Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.Reprints and permission information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/reprintsandpermissions/Journal peer review information: Nature Communications thanks the anonymousreviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports areavailable.Publisher\u2019s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims inpublished maps and institutional af\ufb01liations.Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative CommonsAttribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you giveappropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the CreativeCommons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third partymaterial in this article are included in the article\u2019s Creative Commons license, unlessindicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in thearticle\u2019s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutoryregulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly fromthe copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.\u00a9 The Author(s) 2019Boris K. Biskaborn1, Sharon L. Smith2, Jeannette Noetzli3, Heidrun Matthes1, Gon\u00e7alo Vieira4,Dmitry A. Streletskiy5, Philippe Schoeneich6, Vladimir E. Romanovsky7, Antoni G. Lewkowicz8,Andrey Abramov9, Michel Allard10, Julia Boike1,11, William L. Cable1, Hanne H. Christiansen12,Reynald Delaloye13, Bernhard Diekmann1,14, Dmitry Drozdov15, Bernd Etzelm\u00fcller16, Guido Grosse1,14,Mauro Guglielmin17, Thomas Ingeman-Nielsen18, Ketil Isaksen19, Mamoru Ishikawa20,Margareta Johansson21, Halldor Johannsson22, Anseok Joo22, Dmitry Kaverin23, Alexander Kholodov7,9,Pavel Konstantinov24, Tim Kr\u00f6ger25, Christophe Lambiel26, Jean-Pierre Lanckman22, Dongliang Luo27,Galina Malkova15, Ian Meiklejohn28, Natalia Moskalenko15, Marc Oliva29, Marcia Phillips3, Miguel Ramos30,A. Britta K. Sannel31, Dmitrii Sergeev32, Cathy Seybold33, Pavel Skryabin24, Alexander Vasiliev15,34,Qingbai Wu27, Kenji Yoshikawa7, Mikhail Zheleznyak24& Hugues Lantuit1,141Alfred Wegener Institute Helmholtz Centre for Polar and Marine Research, Potsdam 14473, Germany.2Geological Survey of Canada, NaturalResources Canada, Ottawa ON-K1A 0E8, Canada.3WSL Institute for Snow and Avalanche Research SLF, Davos CH-7260, Switzerland.4CEG/IGOT, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon 1600-276, Portugal.5George Washington University, Washington DC 20052, USA.6Institut de G\u00e9ographieAlpine, Grenoble F-38100, France.7University of Alaska Fairbanks, Fairbanks AK-99775, USA.8University of Ottawa, Ottawa K1N 6N5, Canada.9Institute of Physicochemical and Biological Problems of Soil Science, RAS, Moscow 142290, Russia.10Universit\u00e9 Laval, Centre d\u2019\u00e9tudes nordiques,Qu\u00e9bec G1V 0A6, Canada.11Humboldt-Universit\u00e4t, Geography Department, Berlin 10099, Germany.12The University Center in Svalbard,Longyearbyen N-9171, Norway.13University of Fribourg, Fribourg CH-1700, Switzerland.14University of Potsdam, Potsdam 14469, Germany.15EarthCryosphere Institute, Tyumen Scienti\ufb01c Centre SB RAS, Tyumen 625000, Russia.16University of Oslo, Department of Geosciences, Oslo N-0316,Norway.17Insubria University, Department of Theoretical and Applied Sciences, Varese 21100, Italy.18Technical University of Denmark, Departmentof Civil Engineering, Kgs. Lyngby DK-2800, Denmark.19Norwegian Meteorological Institute, Oslo 0313, Norway.20Hokkaido University, Sapporo060-0810, Japan.21Lund University, Lund 22362, Sweden.22Arctic Portal, Akureyri 600, Iceland.23Komi Science Centre, RAS, Syktyvkar 167972,ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-410 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:264 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08 240-4| www.nature.com/naturecommunications Russia.24Melnikov Permafrost Institute, RAS, Yakutsk 677010, Russia.25Free University Berlin, Geography Department, Berlin 12249, Germany.26University of Lausanne, Lausanne 1015, Switzerland.27Northwest Institute of Eco-environment and Resource, CAS, Lanzhou 730000, China.28Rhodes University, Grahamstown 6140, South Africa.29University of Barcelona, Barcelona 08001, Spain.30Universidad de Alcal\u00e1, Madrid 28801,Spain.31Stockholm University, Stockholm SE-106 91, Sweden.32Institute of Environmental Geoscience, RAS, Moscow 101000, Russia.33NationalSoil Survey Center, Lincoln NE-68508, USA.34Tyumen State University, Tyumen 625003, RussiaNATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-4 ARTICLENATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:264 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08 240-4| www.nature.com/naturecommunications 11 Supplementary resourcesSupplementary MaterialJanuary 2019Boris K. Biskaborn\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0Sharon L. Smith\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0Jeannette Noetzli\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0Heidrun Matthes\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0Hugues LantuitCitations (5)References (51)... Although temporal dynamics of ALT are beyond our analy- ses, our findings suggest that thaw depth and air temperatures are, to a degree, decoupled by local conditions. Recent warming trends in the atmosphere ( Guo et al., 2017) are already very visible in circumpolar permafrost temperature observations ( Romanovsky et al., 2017;Biskaborn et al., 2019), implying that the permafrost system will remain dynamic in the future's changing climate. Warmer air temperatures will occur mostly during winters (AMAP, 2017;Guo et al., 2017), which, given the presented high con- tribution of FDD to MAGT, suggests that changes are fore- seeable. ...... Other climatic factors, however, bear significance. Biskaborn et al. (2019), for example, reported a ground warming in the discontinuous permafrost zone between 2007 and 2016 due to an increase in snow thickness even though no significant change in air temperature during a similar pe- riod occurred. Projected warmer winters can also affect ALT through changing snow conditions and subsequent changes in hydrology and vegetation (Park et al., 2013;Atchley et al., 2016;Peng et al., 2018). ...New insights into the environmental factors controlling the ground thermal regime across the Northern Hemisphere: a comparison between permafrost and non-permafrost areasArticleFull-text availableFeb 2019TC Olli Karjalainen Jan Hjort Miska Luoto Juha AaltoThe thermal state of permafrost affects Earth surface systems and human activity in the Arctic and has implications for global climate. Improved understanding of the local-scale variability in the global ground thermal regime is required to account for its sensitivity to changing climatic and geoecological conditions. Here, we statistically related observations of mean annual ground temperature (MAGT) and active-layer thickness (ALT) to high-resolution (\u223c1 km\u00b2) geospatial data of climatic and local environmental conditions across the Northern Hemisphere. The aim was to characterize the relative importance of key environmental factors and the magnitude and shape of their effects on MAGT and ALT. The multivariate models fitted well to both response variables with average R\u00b2 values being \u223c0.94 and 0.78. Corresponding predictive performances in terms of root-mean-square error were \u223c1.31 \u2218C and 87 cm. Freezing (FDD) and thawing (TDD) degree days were key factors for MAGT inside and outside the permafrost domain with average effect sizes of 6.7 and 13.6 \u2218C, respectively. Soil properties had marginal effects on MAGT (effect size =0.4\u20130.7 \u2218C). For ALT, rainfall (effect size =181 cm) and solar radiation (161 cm) were most influential. Analysis of variable importance further underlined the dominance of climate for MAGT and highlighted the role of solar radiation for ALT. Most response shapes for MAGT \u22640 \u2218C and ALT were non-linear and indicated thresholds for covariation. Most importantly, permafrost temperatures had a more complex relationship with air temperatures than non-frozen ground. Moreover, the observed warming effect of rainfall on MAGT\u22640\u2218C reverted after reaching an optimum at \u223c250 mm, and that of snowfall started to level off at \u223c300\u2013400 mm. It is suggested that the factors of large global variation (i.e. climate) suppressed the effects of local-scale factors (i.e. soil properties and vegetation) owing to the extensive study area and limited representation of soil organic matter. Our new insights into the factors affecting the ground thermal regime at a 1 km scale should improve future hemispheric-scale studies.ViewShow abstract... The temperature range and the water and ice content of the upper soil layer of seasonally freezing and thawing ground (the active layer) determine the biologi- cal and hydrological processes that operate within this layer. Warming of permafrost over the last few decades has been re- ported from many circum-Arctic boreholes ( Biskaborn et al., 2019;Romanovsky et al., 2010). Warming and thawing of permafrost and an overall reduction in the area that it covers have been predicted under future climate change scenarios by the CMIP5 climate models, but at widely varying rates ( Koven et al., 2012;McGuire et al., 2018). ...A 16-year record (2002-2017) of permafrost, active-layer, and meteorological conditions at the Samoylov Island Arctic permafrost research site, Lena River delta, northern Siberia: An opportunity to validate remote-sensing data and land surface, snow, and permafrost modelsArticleFull-text availableFeb 2019 Jan Nitzbon Katharina Anders Lars Kutzbach Julia BoikeMost of the world's permafrost is located in the Arctic, where its frozen organic carbon content makes it a potentially important influence on the global climate system. The Arctic climate appears to be changing more rapidly than the lower latitudes, but observational data density in the region is low. Permafrost thaw and carbon release into the atmosphere, as well as snow cover changes, are positive feedback mechanisms that have the potential for climate warming. It is therefore particularly important to understand the links between the energy balance, which can vary rapidly over hourly to annual timescales, and permafrost conditions, which changes slowly on decadal to centennial timescales. This requires long-term observational data such as that available from the Samoylov research site in northern Siberia, where meteorological parameters, energy balance, and subsurface observations have been recorded since 1998. This paper presents the temporal data set produced between 2002 and 2017, explaining the instrumentation, calibration, processing, and data quality control. Furthermore, we present a merged data set of the parameters, which were measured from 1998 onwards. Additional data include a high-resolution digital terrain model (DTM) obtained from terrestrial lidar laser scanning. Since the data provide observations of temporally variable parameters that influence energy fluxes between permafrost, active-layer soils, and the atmosphere (such as snow depth and soil moisture content), they are suitable for calibrating and quantifying the dynamics of permafrost as a component in earth system models. The data also include soil properties beneath different microtopographic features (a polygon centre, a rim, a slope, and a trough), yielding much-needed information on landscape heterogeneity for use in land surface modelling. For the record from 1998 to 2017, the average mean annual air temperature was \u221212.3 \u2218C, with mean monthly temperature of the warmest month (July) recorded as 9.5 \u2218C and for the coldest month (February) \u221232.7 \u2218C. The average annual rainfall was 169 mm. The depth of zero annual amplitude is at 20.75 m. At this depth, the temperature has increased from \u22129.1 \u2218C in 2006 to \u22127.7 \u2218C in 2017. The presented data are freely available through the PANGAEA (https://doi.org/10.1594/PANGAEA.891142) and Zenodo (https://zenodo.org/record/2223709, last access: 6 February 2019) websites.ViewShow abstract... Ongoing degradation of mountain permafrost 15 coincides with observations of increasing rockfall activity ( Ravanel and Deline, 2011;Huggel et al., 2012;Gobiet et al., 2014) potentially triggering large scale hazard events via complex process chains ( Huggel et al., 2005;Westoby et al., 2014;Haeberli et al., 2017). While the long-term trend of rising permafrost temperatures can be clearly observed at a global scale (Biskaborn et al., 2019) warming trends of mountain permafrost are more diverse in their behavior ( Noetzli et al., 2018). For example 1 Earth Syst. ...A decade of detailed observations (2008\u20132018) in steep bedrock permafrost at Matterhorn H\u00f6rnligrat (Zermatt, CH)ArticleFull-text availableFeb 2019 Reto Da Forno Samuel Weber Mustafa Yuecel Jan BeutelThe PermaSense project is an ongoing interdisciplinary effort between geo-science and engineering disciplines started in 2006 with the goals to make observations possible that previously have not been possible. Specifically the aims are to obtain measurements data in unprecedented quantity and quality based on technological advances. This paper describes a unique ten+ year data record obtained from in-situ measurements in steep bedrock permafrost in an Alpine environment on the Matterhorn H\u00f6rnligrat, Zermatt Switzerland at 3500 m a.s.l. Through the utilization of state-of-the-art wireless sensor technology it was possible to obtain more data of higher quality, make this data available in near real-time and tightly monitor and control the running experiments. This data set (DOI: https://doi.org/10.1594/PANGAEA.897640, Weber et al., 2019a) constitutes the longest, densest and most diverse data record in the history of mountain permafrost research worldwide with 17 different sensor types used at 29 distinct sensor locations consisting of over 114.5 million data points captured over a period of ten+ years. By documenting and sharing this data in this form we contribute to making our past research reproducible and facilitate future research based on this data e.g. in the area of analysis methodology, comparative studies, assessment of change in the environment, natural hazard warning and the development of process models.ViewShow abstract... Permafrost is warming across the globe ( Biskaborn et al., 2019) and within the last two decades upper permafrost temperatures have risen by 0.5-2.0\u00b0C ( Romanovsky et al., 2010). ...Ecosystem carbon response of an Arctic peatland to simulated permafrost thawArticleFull-text availableJan 2019GLOBAL CHANGE BIOL Carolina Voigt Christina Biasi Maija E. Marushchak Mikhail MastepanovPermafrost peatlands are biogeochemical hot spots in the Arctic as they store vast amounts of carbon. Permafrost thaw could release part of these long\u2010term immobile carbon stocks as the greenhouse gases (GHGs) carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4) to the atmosphere, but how much, at which time\u2010span and as which gaseous carbon species is still highly uncertain. Here we assess the effect of permafrost thaw on GHG dynamics under different moisture and vegetation scenarios in a permafrost peatland. A novel experimental approach using intact plant\u2013soil systems (mesocosms) allowed us to simulate permafrost thaw under near\u2010natural conditions. We monitored GHG flux dynamics via high\u2010resolution flow\u2010through gas measurements, combined with detailed monitoring of soil GHG concentration dynamics, yielding insights into GHG production and consumption potential of individual soil layers. Thawing the upper 10\u201315cm of permafrost under dry conditions increased CO2 emissions to the atmosphere (without vegetation: 0.74\u00b10.49 vs. 0.84\u00b10.60g CO2\u2013C m\u22122d\u22121; with vegetation: 1.20\u00b10.50 vs. 1.32\u00b10.60g CO2\u2013C m\u22122d\u22121, mean\u00b1SD, pre\u2010 and post\u2010thaw, respectively). Radiocarbon dating (14C) of respired CO2, supported by an independent curve fitting approach, showed a clear contribution (9\u201327%) of old carbon to this enhanced post\u2010thaw CO2 flux. Elevated concentrations of CO2, CH4, and dissolved organic carbon at depth indicated not just pulse emissions during the thawing process, but sustained decomposition and GHG production from thawed permafrost. Oxidation of CH4 in the peat column, however, prevented CH4 release to the atmosphere. Importantly, we show here that, under dry conditions, peatlands strengthen the permafrost\u2013carbon feedback by adding to the atmospheric CO2 burden post\u2010thaw. However, as long as the water table remains low, our results reveal a strong CH4 sink capacity in these types of Arctic ecosystems pre\u2010 and post\u2010thaw, with the potential to compensate part of the permafrost CO2 losses over longer timescales. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.ViewShow abstract... Warming of permafrost over the last few decades has been reported from many circum-Arctic boreholes ( Biskaborn et al., 2018;Romanovsky et al., 2010). Warming and thawing of perma- 60 frost and an overall reduction in the area that it covers have been predicted under future climate change scenarios by the CMIP5 climate models, but at widely varying rates ( Koven et al., 2012;McGuire et al., 2018). ...A 16-year record (2002\u20132017) of permafrost, active layer, and meteorological conditions at the Samoylov Island Arctic permafrost research site, Lena River Delta, northern Siberia: an opportunity to validate remote sensing data and land surface, snow, and permafrost modelsArticleFull-text availableJul 2018 Jan Nitzbon Katharina Anders Lars Kutzbach Julia BoikeMost of the world's permafrost is located in the Arctic, where its frozen organic carbon con-tent makes it a potentially important influence on the global climate system. The Arctic climate appears to be changing more rapidly than the lower latitudes, but observational data density in the region is low. Permafrost thaw and carbon release into the atmosphere is a positive feed-back mechanism that has the potential for climate warming. It is therefore particularly im-portant to understand the links between the energy balance, which can vary rapidly over hour-ly to annual time scales, and permafrost condition, which changes slowly on decadal to cen-tennial timescales. This requires long-term observational data such as that available from the Samoylov research site in northern Siberia, where meteorological parameters, energy balance, and subsurface observations have been recorded since 1998. This paper presents the temporal data set produced between 2002 and 2017, explaining the instrumentation, calibration, pro-cessing and data quality control. Additional data include a high-resolution digital terrain mod-el (DTM) obtained from terrestrial LiDAR laser scanning. Since the data provide observations of temporally variable parameters that influence energy fluxes between permafrost, active lay-er soils, and the atmosphere (such as snow depth and soil moisture content), they are suitable for calibrating and quantifying the dynamics of permafrost as a component in earth system models. The data also include soil properties beneath different microtopographic features (a polygon center, a rim, a slope, and a trough), yielding much-needed information on landscape heterogeneity for use in land surface modeling. For the record from 1998 to 2017, the average mean annual air temperature was \u221212.3\u00b0C, with mean monthly temperature of the warmest month (July) recorded as 9.5\u00b0C and for the coldest month (February) \u221232.7\u00b0C. The average annual rainfall was 169mm. The depth of zero annual amplitude niveau is at 20.8m, and has warmed from \u22129.1\u00b0C in 2006 to \u22127.7\u00b0C in 2017. The presented data are available in the supplementary material of this paper and through the PANGAEA website (https://doi.org/10.1594/PANGAEA.891142).ViewShow abstractDegrading permafrost puts Arctic infrastructure at risk by mid-centuryArticleFull-text availableDec 2018 Olli Karjalainen Jan Hjort Miska Luoto Juha AaltoDegradation of near-surface permafrost can pose a serious threat to the utilization of natural resources, and to the sustainable development of Arctic communities. Here we identify at unprecedentedly high spatial resolution infrastructure hazard areas in the Northern Hemi- sphere\u2019s permafrost regions under projected climatic changes and quantify fundamental engineering structures at risk by 2050. We show that nearly four million people and 70% of current infrastructure in the permafrost domain are in areas with high potential for thaw of near-surface permafrost. Our results demonstrate that one-third of pan-Arctic infrastructure and 45% of the hydrocarbon extraction \ufb01elds in the Russian Arctic are in regions where thaw-related ground instability can cause severe damage to the built environment. Alarmingly, these \ufb01gures are not reduced substantially even if the climate change targets of the Paris Agreement are reached.ViewShow abstractRecently amplified arctic warming has contributed to a continual global warming trendArticleFull-text availableNov 2017Nat. Clim. Change. Qiyi Zhang Jiansong Zhang Xiangdong Zhang Jianbin HuangThe existence and magnitude of the recently suggested global warming hiatus, or slowdown, have been strongly debated1\u20133. Although various physical processes4\u20138 have been examined to elucidate this phenomenon, the accuracy and completeness of observational data that comprise global average surface air temperature (SAT) datasets is a concern9,10. In particular, these datasets lack either complete geographic coverage or in situ observations over the Arctic, owing to the sparse observational network in this area\u2079. As a consequence, the contribution of Arctic warming to global SAT changes may have been underestimated, leading to an uncertainty in the hiatus debate. Here, we constructed a new Arctic SAT dataset using the most recently updated global SATs\u00b2 and a drifting buoys based Arctic SAT dataset\u00b9\u00b9 through employing the \u2018data interpolating empirical orthogonal functions\u2019 method\u00b9\u00b2. Our estimate of global SAT rate of increase is around 0.112 \u00b0C per decade, instead of 0.05 \u00b0C per decade from IPCC AR5\u00b9, for 1998\u20132012. Analysis of this dataset shows that the amplified Arctic warming over the past decade has significantly contributed to a continual global warming trend, rather than a hiatus or slowdown.ViewShow abstractStrategy and Implementation Plan 2016-2020 for the Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost (GTN-P).Technical ReportFull-text availableNov 2017 Sharon L. Smith Boris K Biskaborn Dmitry A Streletskiy Philippe SchoeneichPermafrost is recognized as Essential Climate Variable (ECV) within the Global Climate Observing System of UN and ICSU organisations. The Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost (GTN-P) is the primary international programme concerned with long-term monitoring of permafrost. The core mission of the GTN-P is sustained comprehensive long-term monitoring network, in order to provide consistent, representative and high quality standardized long-term data series of selected permafrost parameters at key sites and to assess their state and changes over time. The Strategy and Implementation Plan 2016-2020 outlines recent progress and future challenges facing the network. It describes the governance and management structure of GTN-P, linkages to regional and global observing systems, management process and reporting strategies. It presents measurement methods and protocols used in field data collection and state of the art data management system, which was recently designed and implemented to process, analyse, and visualize permafrost data. It concludes with the outlook of the future developments of the network in order to sustain and succeed its core mission of providing long-term observations and maintain the availability of data collected.ViewShow abstractPermafrost Thermal StateArticleFull-text availableAug 2017B AM METEOROL SOC Lin Zhao Jeannette Noetzli Boris K Biskaborn Dmitry A StreletskiyViewLess Than 2 \u00b0C Warming by 2100 UnlikelyArticleJul 2017Nat. Clim. Change. Alec Zimmer Peiran Liu Dargan M. W. Frierson Adrian E. RafteryThe recently published Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) projections to 2100 give likely ranges of global temperature increase in four scenarios for population, economic growth and carbon use. However, these projections are not based on a fully statistical approach. Here we use a country-specific version of Kaya's identity to develop a statistically based probabilistic forecast of CO 2 emissions and temperature change to 2100. Using data for 1960-2010, including the UN's probabilistic population projections for all countries, we develop a joint Bayesian hierarchical model for Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita and carbon intensity. We find that the 90% interval for cumulative CO 2 emissions includes the IPCC's two middle scenarios but not the extreme ones. The likely range of global temperature increase is 2.0-4.9 \u00b0C, with median 3.2 \u00b0C and a 5% (1%) chance that it will be less than 2 \u00b0C (1.5 \u00b0C). Population growth is not a major contributing factor. Our model is not a business as usual' scenario, but rather is based on data which already show the effect of emission mitigation policies. Achieving the goal of less than 1.5 \u00b0C warming will require carbon intensity to decline much faster than in the recent past.ViewShow abstractR: A Language and Environment for Statistical ComputingBookJan 2011 Development Core R TeamViewAn observation-based constraint on permafrost loss as a function of global warmingArticleApr 2017Nat. Clim. Change. Sebastian Westermann Sarah Chadburn Peter M. Cox Eleanor J. BurkePermafrost, which covers 15 million km 2 of the land surface, is one of the components of the Earth system that is most sensitive to warming. Loss of permafrost would radically change high-latitude hydrology and biogeochemical cycling, and could therefore provide very significant feedbacks on climate change. The latest climate models all predict warming of high-latitude soils and thus thawing of permafrost under future climate change, but with widely varying magnitudes of permafrost thaw. Here we show that in each of the models, their present-day spatial distribution of permafrost and air temperature can be used to infer the sensitivity of permafrost to future global warming. Using the same approach for the observed permafrost distribution and air temperature, we estimate a sensitivity of permafrost area loss to global mean warming at stabilization of million km 2 \u00b0C \u00e2 '1 (1\u03c3 confidence), which is around 20% higher than previous studies. Our method facilitates an assessment for COP21 climate change targets: if the climate is stabilized at 2 \u00b0C above pre-industrial levels, we estimate that the permafrost area would eventually be reduced by over 40%. Stabilizing at 1.5 \u00b0C rather than 2 \u00b0C would save approximately 2 million km 2 of permafrost. \u00a9 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.ViewShow abstractRecent regional climate cooling on the Antarctic Peninsula and associated impacts on the cryosphereArticleDec 2016SCI TOTAL ENVIRON Francisco Navarro Filip Hrbacek Marc Oliva Ricardo M TrigoViewDerivation and analysis of a high-resolution estimate of global permafrost zonationArticleFull-text availableFeb 2012TC Stephan GruberPermafrost underlies much of Earth's surface and interacts with climate, eco-systems and human systems. It is a complex phenomenon controlled by climate and (sub-) surface properties and reacts to change with variable delay. Heterogeneity and sparse data challenge the modeling of its spatial distribution. Currently, there is no data set to adequately inform global studies of permafrost. The available data set for the Northern Hemisphere is frequently used for model evaluation, but its quality and consistency are difficult to assess. Here, a global model of permafrost extent and dataset of permafrost zonation are presented and discussed, extending earlier studies by including the Southern Hemisphere, by consistent data and methods, by attention to uncertainty and scaling. Established relationships between air temperature and the occurrence of permafrost are re-formulated into a model that is parametrized using published estimates. It is run with a high-resolution (<1 km) global elevation data and air temperatures based on the NCAR-NCEP reanalysis and CRU TS 2.0. The resulting data provide more spatial detail and a consistent extrapolation to remote regions, while aggregated values resemble previous studies. The estimated uncertainties affect regional patterns and aggregate number, and provide interesting insight. The permafrost area, i.e. the actual surface area underlain by permafrost, north of 60\u00b0 S is estimated to be 13\u201318 \u00d7 10<sup>6</sup> km<sup>2</sup> or 9\u201314 % of the exposed land surface. The global permafrost area including Antarctic and sub-sea permafrost is estimated to be 16\u201321 \u00d7 10<sup>6</sup> km<sup>2</sup>. The global permafrost region, i.e. the exposed land surface below which some permafrost can be expected, is estimated to be 22 \u00b1 3 \u00d7 10<sup>6</sup> km<sup>2</sup>. A large proportion of this exhibits considerable topography and spatially-discontinuous permafrost, underscoring the importance of attention to scaling issues and heterogeneity in large-area models.ViewShow abstractGreater effect of increasing shrub height on winter versus summer soil temperatureArticleFull-text availableAug 2016ENVIRON RES LETT M\u00e9lissa Paradis Esther L\u00e9vesque St\u00e9phane BoudreauShrub expansion is increasingly observed in arctic and subarctic environments. The development of shrub structure may significantly impact the abiotic environment at the local scale. Our objective was to reconstruct the development of the vertical structure of Betula glandulosa Michx. and to evaluate its effects on winter and summer soil temperature and on snow depth. Stratified sampling of the shrub revealed that shrub biomass distribution followed a similar pattern in stands of contrasting heights. Woody biomass was maximal in the lower stratum and relatively stable in the intermediate strata, while the foliar biomass tracked the vertical development of the shrub structure. Dendrochronological analysis revealed that shrub stands are relatively young; most of the dominant stems started their development after 1990. Shrub height was positively associated with both the dominant stem age and its vertical growth rate. Temperature differences among sites were greater during winter (ca 10 \u00b0C) than during summer (ca 2 \u00b0C), while the sum of freezing degree-days varied from 680 \u00b0C to 2125 \u00b0C. Shrub height was the most plausible variable explaining snow depth, winter ground level temperature and the sum of freezing degree-days. However, woody biomass in the 30\u201340 cm strata best explained summer ground level temperature. Our results suggest that the development of a shrub structure will have far-reaching consequences on the abiotic environment of subarctic ecosystems.ViewShow abstractShow moreAdJoin ResearchGate to find the people and research you need to help your work.15+ million members118+ million publications700k+ research projectsJoin for freeRecommendationsDiscover more publications, questions and projects in PermafrostProjectLandscape Processes in Antarctic Ecosystems Ian MeiklejohnView projectProjectMonitoring and Assessment of the Arctic L. O. Reiersen Simon J. Wilson Roland Kallenborn[...] John WalshView projectProjectcheck with Terry Callaghan, who employed me Fredrik Bergholm Terry V Callaghan Margareta Johansson[...] Torben R\u00f8jle ChristensenView projectProjectTHE BRIDGE BUILDER EXPEDITIONS | SPITSBERGEN (SVALBARD). Lars Hansen Arne Ardeberg Jonas Hagstr\u00f6m[...] Fridtjof MehlumBACKGROUND: The BRIDGE BUILDER EXPEDITIONS are the overarching definition for a series of contemporary and scientifically sustainable projects established by The IK Foundation, an undertaking whic h aims to inspire and contribute to understanding of our shared planet! These projects are grounded in the concepts of retracing and lifting both practical and theoretical knowledge from the Linnaeus Apostles' journeys. FORLANDS\u00d8YANE, SPITSBERGEN (SVALBARD): Forlands\u00f8yane consist of three small islands \u2013 Nord\u00f8ya, Midt\u00f8ya and S\u00f8r\u00f8ya \u2013 close to the west coast of Prins Karls Forland, Spitsbergen, Svalbard which are highly interesting and important from many points of view. Still, investigation of these islands have been rather limited not at least due to the highly vulnerable situation of the islands from the Greenland Sea and the difficulty of landing along the exposed coast. Although the islands have been known to seafarers for centuries, as a sheltered natural harbour and \"a living pantry\" for collecting of bird eggs and hunting fields of birds and seals. But also a place for collecting the valuable and insulating down from nesting eiders. Further, during the latest century, environmental and other protection of their precious nature, flora and fauna as well as their cultural heritage has been very well conducted. The first known and documented scientific investigation of Forlands\u00f8yane took place on the first of July, 1758. Then, Anton Rolandsson Martin, one of the Linnaeus Apostles, managed to get ashore and study the landscape at the Forlands\u00f8yane islands. For the purpose of scientific studies of the climate, fauna and flora of Spitsbergen, he was a guest naturalist aboard a whaling ship. While able to stay on this location for a few hours only, Anton Rolandsson Martin, scientifically trained by Carl Linnaeus and highly motivated, used the time available in a very determined manner. In addition to writing a thorough description of the landscape, size and form of the island, climate, fauna and flora, he selected a small but significant rock sample for further studies at home. This sample was documented, studied and classified by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. It is noted that the same Academy had provided important funding for his Spitsbergen research endeavour. Inspired by the pioneer investigations of Anton Rolandsson Martin, The IK Foundation arranged, in September 2016 (Voyage I) a research expedition to Spitsbergen and, not at least to the largest of the three islands, Midt\u00f8ya. The expedition was part of The IK Foundation\u2019s global BRIDGE BUILDER EXPEDITIONS programme. Just as Anton Rolandsson Martin in 1758, the members of the 2016 expedition studied the west coast of Spitsbergen concerning climate, glaciers, flora and fauna as well as its impressively well-preserved cultural heritage. At the same time, the expedition, guided by Anton Rolandsson Martin\u2019s diary, succeeded in confirming Forlands\u00f8yane as the islands visited and studied by him. His diary was additionally first published in English by the IK Foundation in 2007 \u2013 The Linnaeus Apostles Global Science & Adventure (Volume Two, Book One), together with his Talk On Norwegian Housekeeping based on his observations from a journey to Norway in 1759-1760. More information on Anton Rolandsson Martin as a person and his work can be found in iFACTS and iMAPS. During Voyage II a year later (2017), the expedition visited Forlands\u00f8yane for further documentation and studies, in particular visits to the second largest island, Nord\u00f8ya and the nearest coast of Prins Karls Forland. READ MORE > https://www.ikfoundation.org/ilinnaeus/iprojects/spitsbergen.php ... [more]View projectArticleFull-text availableThe new database of the Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost (GTN-P)September 2015 \u00b7 Earth System Science DataJ.-P. Lanckman Boris K Biskaborn Hugues Lantuit[...] Vladimir E RomanovskyThe Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost (GTN-P) provides the first dynamic database associated with the Thermal State of Permafrost (TSP) and the Circumpolar Active Layer Monitoring (CALM) programs, which extensively collect permafrost temperature and active layer thickness (ALT) data from Arctic, Antarctic and mountain permafrost regions. The purpose of GTN-P is to establish an early ... [Show full abstract] warning system for the consequences of climate change in permafrost regions and to provide standardized thermal permafrost data to global models. In this paper we introduce the GTN-P database and perform statistical analysis of the GTN-P metadata to identify and quantify the spatial gaps in the site distribution in relation to climate-effective environmental parameters. We describe the concept and structure of the data management system in regard to user operability, data transfer and data policy. We outline data sources and data processing including quality control strategies based on national correspondents. Assessment of the metadata and data quality reveals 63 % metadata completeness at active layer sites and 50 % metadata completeness for boreholes. Voronoi tessellation analysis on the spatial sample distribution of boreholes and active layer measurement sites quantifies the distribution inhomogeneity and provides a potential method to locate additional permafrost research sites by improving the representativeness of thermal monitoring across areas underlain by permafrost. The depth distribution of the boreholes reveals that 73 % are shallower than 25 m and 27 % are deeper, reaching a maximum of 1 km depth. Comparison of the GTN-P site distribution with permafrost zones, soil organic carbon contents and vegetation types exhibits different local to regional monitoring situations, which are illustrated with maps. Preferential slope orientation at the sites most likely causes a bias in the temperature monitoring and should be taken into account when using the data for global models. The distribution of GTN-P sites within zones of projected temperature change show a high representation of areas with smaller expected temperature rise but a lower number of sites within Arctic areas where climate models project extreme temperature increase.View full-textArticleFull-text availableThe Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost Database: metadata statistics and prospective analysis...March 2015J.-P. Lanckman Boris K Biskaborn Hugues Lantuit[...] Vladimir E RomanovskyThe Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost (GTN-P) provides the first dynamic database associated with the Thermal State of Permafrost (TSP) and the Circumpolar Active Layer Monitoring (CALM) programs, which extensively collect permafrost temperature and active layer thickness data from Arctic, Antarctic and Mountain permafrost regions. The purpose of the database is to establish an \"early ... [Show full abstract] warning system\" for the consequences of climate change in permafrost regions and to provide standardized thermal permafrost data to global models. In this paper we perform statistical analysis of the GTN-P metadata aiming to identify the spatial gaps in the GTN-P site distribution in relation to climate-effective environmental parameters. We describe the concept and structure of the Data Management System in regard to user operability, data transfer and data policy. We outline data sources and data processing including quality control strategies. Assessment of the metadata and data quality reveals 63% metadata completeness at active layer sites and 50% metadata completeness for boreholes. Voronoi Tessellation Analysis on the spatial sample distribution of boreholes and active layer measurement sites quantifies the distribution inhomogeneity and provides potential locations of additional permafrost research sites to improve the representativeness of thermal monitoring across areas underlain by permafrost. The depth distribution of the boreholes reveals that 73% are shallower than 25 m and 27% are deeper, reaching a maximum of 1 km depth. Comparison of the GTN-P site distribution with permafrost zones, soil organic carbon contents and vegetation types exhibits different local to regional monitoring situations on maps. Preferential slope orientation at the sites most likely causes a bias in the temperature monitoring and should be taken into account when using the data for global models. The distribution of GTN-P sites within zones of projected temperature change show a high representation of areas with smaller expected temperature rise but a lower number of sites within arctic areas were climate models project extreme temperature increase. This paper offers a scientific basis for planning future permafrost research sites on large scales.View full-textChapterFull-text availableKnowledge Transfer by the Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost (GTN-P)March 2018 Boris K Biskaborn Hugues LantuitPermafrost ecosystems occupy a quarter of the land surface in the Northern Hemisphere. Ongoing rapid temperature change in these areas causes permafrost warming in the Arctic and thawing in the Subarctic regions (Romanovsky et al. Permafr Periglac Process 21:106\u2013116 2010). View full-textArticleFull-text availablePermafrost degradation on a warmer Earth: Challenges and perspectivesMarch 2018 Michael Fritz Marc OlivaPermafrost, the permanently frozen ground, is warming due to global temperature rise. Permafrost research has progressed rapidly in the last decade, as large areas in the Polar Regions, in mountain environments and on high-altitude plateaus are experiencing accelerated environmental changes in response to thaw and permafrost degradation. Climate scenarios for the next decades project a reduced ... [Show full abstract] the extent of permafrost coverage and increasing ground temperatures, promoting changes in terrestrial and nearshore ecosystem dynamics. Future research in permafrost regions should focus on a better understanding of the biogeochemical cycles associated with abrupt and long-term permafrost degradation. Risk assessment of natural hazards and geoenvironmental engineering solutions are needed to reduce the potential dramatic socio-economic implications that permafrost degradation may entail in these regions.View full-textDiscover moreLast Updated: 06 Mar 2019Download citationWhat type of file do you want? RIS BibTeX Plain TextWhat do you want to download? Citation only Citation and abstractDownloadInterested in research on Permafrost?Join ResearchGate to discover and stay up-to-date with the latest research from leading experts in Permafrost and many other scientific topics.Join for freeorDiscover by subject areaRecruit researchersJoin for freeLoginEmail Tip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inor log in withWelcome back! Please log in.Email \u00b7 HintTip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inor log in withNo account? Sign upAboutNewsCompanyCareersSupportHelp centerFAQBusiness solutionsRecruitingAdvertisingAd\u00a9 ResearchGate 2019. All rights reserved.ImprintTermsPrivacy", "| National Snow and Ice Data Center Skip to main content National Snow and Ice Data Center Home Data Data Sets for Research Brightness Temperature Glaciers Ice Sheets Permafrost Sea Ice Soil Moisture Snow ...search for more Scientific Data Search Support for Researchers Analysis & Imaging Tools Data Announcements Submit Your Data Data Policies User Support Data for Everyone Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Glacier Photograph Collection Greenland Ice Sheet Today MASIE (Daily sea ice extent) Satellite Observations of Arctic Change Sea Ice Index Virtual Globes: Google Earth Sponsored Programs Antarctic Glaciological Data Center Exchange for Local Observations and Knowledge of the Arctic (ELOKA) NOAA at NSIDC NASA Distributed Active Archive Center at NSIDC (NSIDC DAAC) Looking for facts and information? See About the Cryosphere. Research Scientists Research Grants Scientific Publications Informatics Research NSIDC Scientific Expeditions On Thin Ice: Expedition to a Crumbling Ice Shelf Scientists blog from Antarctica and provide a glimpse of what it's like to do research in the field. Read their blog ... News For the Media Newsroom: For the Media For Data Users Data Announcements The Drift Current Conditions Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Greenland Today Satellite Observations of Arctic Change NSIDC In the News Events NSIDC Monthly Highlights Icelights: Answers to your burning questions about ice and climate What's hot in the news around climate and sea ice and what are scientists talking about now? Read more... About About NSIDC NSIDC People Our Sponsors Jobs NSIDC Monthly Highlights Use & Copyright Contact Us Support NSIDC NSIDC's Green Data Center About the Cryosphere Quick Facts All About The Cryosphere All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Frozen Ground All About Sea Ice All About Arctic Climatology & Meteorology Snow, Ice and Climate Change Studying the Cryosphere Photo Gallery Educational Resources Cryosphere Glossary What is the Cryosphere? When scientists talk about the cryosphere, they mean the places on Earth where water is in its solid form, frozen into ice or snow. Read more ... Web pagesData Sets Cryosphere Glossary - Choose a Topic - climatology and meteorology freshwater ice frozen ground or permafrost glaciers icebergs and ice shelves ice sheets sea ice snow Search the Glossary: A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P | Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z | all ablation(1) combined processes (such as sublimation, fusion or melting, evaporation) which remove snow or ice from the surface of a glacier or from a snow-field; also used to express the quantity lost by these processes (2) reduction of the water equivalent of a snow cover by melting, evaporation, wind and avalanches. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorologyglacierssnow ablation areathe area of a glacier where more glacier mass is lost than gained.Topic:\u00a0glaciers ablation hollowsdepressions in the snow surface caused by the sun or warm, gusty wind.Topic:\u00a0glaciers ablation morainemound or layer of moraine in the ablation zone of a glacier; the rock has been plucked from the mountainside by the moving glacier and is melting out on the ice surface.Topic:\u00a0glaciers ablation seasonperiod during which glaciers lose more mass than they gain; usually coincides with summer.Topic:\u00a0glaciers ablation zonearea or zone of a glacier where snow and ice ablation exceed accumulation. Topic:\u00a0glaciers absolute differencethe difference, taken without regard to sign, between the values of two variables absolute errorthe difference between the measured or inferred value of a quantity and its actual value. absolute humidity(1) the ratio of the mass of water vapor to the volume occupied by a mixture of water vapor and dry air (2) mass of water contained in a unit volume of moist air. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology accretiongrowth of a cloud or precipitation particle by the collision and union of a frozen particle (ice crystal or snowflake) with a super-cooled liquid droplet which freezes on impact. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology accumulationall processes by which snow or ice are added to a glacier, this is typically the accumulation of snow, which is slowly transformed into ice; other accumulation processes can include avalanches, wind-deposited snow, and the freezing of rain within the snow pack.Topic:\u00a0glaciersclimatology and meteorologysnow accumulation areaarea of a glacier where more mass is gained than lost.Topic:\u00a0glaciers accumulation seasonperiod during which a glacier gains more mass than it loses; usually coincides with winter.Topic:\u00a0glaciers accumulation zonearea of a glacier where more mass is gained than lost.Topic:\u00a0glaciers accuracythe extent to which the readings of an instrument approach the true value of the calculated or measured quantities, supposing that all possible corrections are applied. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology acid precipitationrain or snow containing acidic substances, resulting from the atmospheric pollution mainly with sulfur and nitrogen; acid precipitation has a lower pH than unpolluted rain. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology active air-cooled thermal pilea foundation pile on which a cold air refrigeration system has been installed to remove heat from the ground. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active construction methods in permafrostspecial design and construction methods used for engineering works in permafrost areas where permafrost degradation cannot be prevented.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active ice wedgean ice wedge that is growing as a result of repeated (but not necessarily annual) winter cracking.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active layerthe layer of ground that is subject to annual thawing and freezing in areas underlain by permafrost; also known as seasonal frost. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active liquid refrigerant pilea foundation pile on which a liquid coolant refrigeration system has been installed to remove heat from the ground.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active rock glaciera mass of rock fragments and finer material, on a slope, that contains either an ice core or interstitial ice, and shows evidence of present movement.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrostglaciers active thermokarstthe process by which characteristic landforms are currently developing as a result of thawing of ice-rich permafrost or melting of massive ice. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active-layer failurea general term referring to several forms of slope failures or failure mechanisms commonly occurring in the active layer overlying permafrost. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active-layer thicknessthe thickness of the layer of the ground that is subject to annual thawing and freeing in areas underlain by permafrost.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost adfreeze strengththe tensile or shear strength which has to be overcome to separate two objects that are bonded together by ice.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost adfreeze/adfreezingthe process by which two objects are bonded together by ice formed between them.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost advancewhen a mountain glacier's terminus extends farther downvalley than before; glacial advance occurs when a glacier flows downvalley faster than the rate of ablation at its terminus. Topic:\u00a0glaciers advectionthe horizontal transfer of air mass properties by the velocity field of the atmosphere. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology advection fogfog which forms in the lower part of a warm moist air mass moving over a colder surface (land or water). Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology aerosolnon-gaseous substances, divided into solid particles or liquid droplets, held in suspension in the atmosphere. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology aggradational icethe additional ground ice formed as a direct result of permafrost aggradation. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost air freezing indexthe cumulative number of degree-days below 0\u00b0 C for the air temperature during a given time period.Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorologyfrozen ground or permafrost air massan extensive body of the atmosphere in which physical properties, particularly temperature and humidity, exhibit only small and continuous differences in the horizontal plane; it may extend over an area of several million square kilometers and over a height of several kilometers. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology air temperaturethe ambient temperature indicated by a thermometer exposed to the air but sheltered from direct solar radiation, or placed in an instrument shelter 1.5 to two meters above ground; also called surface temperature. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology air thawing indexthe cumulative number of degree-days above 0\u00b0C for the air temperature during a given period.Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorologyfrozen ground or permafrost Pages1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 \u2026 next \u203a last \u00bb Find Data Search NSIDC Data NASA Earthdata Search IceBridge Portal Data Collections List Stay Current Arctic Sea Ice News and Analysis Sea Ice Index (Passive microwave satellite data) MASIE (Daily sea ice extent, multi-source) Greenland Today Newsroom Learn About Snow and Ice Icelights: Answers to Your Questions Cryosphere Quick Facts All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Sea Ice Arctic Climatology - A Primer Get Help Knowledge Base Etc. Use & Copyright Web Policy Jobs Home | Contact Us\u00a9 2019, National Snow and Ice Data Center :: Advancing knowledge of Earth's frozen regions", "Permafrost | Define Permafrost at Dictionary.com Dictionary.comThesaurus.comEverything After ZWord of the DayVideoWord FactsGrammarCrossword SolverDaily CrosswordAll The WordsSlangEmojiGender & SexualityAcronymsDictionary.comThesaurus.comTry Our AppsdefinitionsSearchsynonymspermafrost[pur-muh-frawst, -frost]EXAMPLES|WORD ORIGINSEE MORE SYNONYMS FOR permafrost ON THESAURUS.COMnoun(in arctic or subarctic regions) perennially frozen subsoil.Explore Dictionary.comWhy Do Some People Gesticulate So Much?Emoji Challenge: Can You Translate More Emoji Into English?These Are the Longest Words in EnglishWhy Do We Use Onomatopoeia?Origin of permafrostFirst recorded in 1943; perma(nent) + frostAlso called pergelisol.Dictionary.com Unabridged Based on the Random House Unabridged Dictionary, \u00a9 Random House, Inc. 2019Related Words for permafrostchunk, glaze, hail, crystal, iceberg, icicle, glacier, sleet, diamonds, hailstone, floeExamples from the Web for permafrostContemporary Examples of permafrostI wondered what would happen to the trees if some of the permafrost melted, allowing roots to expand in longer growing seasons.Visiting the Arctic Circle\u2026Before It\u2019s Irreversibly ChangedTerry Greene SterlingApril 1, 2014British Dictionary definitions for permafrostpermafrostnounground that is permanently frozen, often to great depths, the surface sometimes thawing in the summerShow MoreWord Origin for permafrostC20: from perma (nent) + frostCollins English Dictionary - Complete & Unabridged 2012 Digital Edition \u00a9 William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd. 1979, 1986 \u00a9 HarperCollins Publishers 1998, 2000, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2012Word Origin and History for permafrostn.1943, coined in English by Russian-born U.S. geologist Siemon W. Muller (1900-1970) from perm(anent) frost.Show MoreOnline Etymology Dictionary, \u00a9 2010 Douglas Harperpermafrost in Sciencepermafrost[p\u00fbr\u2032m\u0259-fr\u00f4st\u2032]A layer of soil or bedrock that has been continuously frozen for at least two years and as long as tens of thousands of years. Permafrost can reach depths of up to 1,524 m (4,999 ft). It is found throughout most of the polar regions and underlies about one fifth of the Earth's land surface.Show MoreThe American Heritage\u00ae Science Dictionary Copyright \u00a9 2011. Published by Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company. All rights reserved.Others Are ReadingThese Words Were Inspired By AnimalsThe Year's Top Word TrendsWord of the Daygreen-eyedUsing These Words Will Make You Sound Like You're From New YorkDictionary.com's Top 10 Grammar TipsNearby words for permafrostperma-perma-pressperma-tanpermaculturepermadeathpermafrostpermafrost tablepermalinkpermalloypermanencepermanencyBrowse the Dictionary:#ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZBrowse by Category:SlangEmojiAcronymsPop CultureMoreAboutCareersContact UsCookies, Terms, & Privacy\u00a9 2019 Dictionary.com, LLC", "Drift mining | Revolvy Trending | Quizzes | Lists Sign up / Login Back | | | | Trending Quizzes Lists Contact Us Terms Privacy Policy Sign up or Login Create Folder My Feed My Topics My Folders Followers Following Quiz Scores Like Revolvy >> Drift mining Back to Top Paste Image Information Here: \u00d7 Image: Source: Save changes \u00d7 Cancel ... \u00d7 OK Cancel OK Cancel \u00d7 OK Cancel \u00d7 OK Cancel \u00d7 OK Cancel \u00d7 Save Cancel \u00d7 OK Clear Cancel \u00d7 OK Clear Cancel are you a bot?", "Drift mining - Wikipedia Drift mining From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search The mining of a mineral deposit by underground methods Drift mining is either the mining of an ore deposit by underground methods, or the working of coal seams accessed by adits driven into the surface outcrop of the coal bed.[1] A drift mine is an underground mine in which the entry or access is above water level and generally on the slope of a hill, driven horizontally into the ore seam.[2] Random House dictionary says the origin of the term \"drift mine\" is an Americanism, circa 1885\u20131890.[3] Drift is a more general mining term, meaning a near-horizontal passageway in a mine, following the bed (of coal, for instance) or vein of ore.[dubious \u2013 discuss] A drift may or may not intersect the ground surface.[4] A drift follows the vein, as distinguished from a crosscut that intersects it, or a level or gallery, which may do either.[5] All horizontal or subhorizontal development openings made in a mine have the generic name of drift. These are simply tunnels made in the rock, with a size and shape depending on their use\u2014for example, haulage, ventilation, or exploration.[6] Contents 1 Historical US drift mining (coal) 1.1 Illinois 1.2 Indiana 1.3 Kentucky 1.4 Maryland 1.5 Ohio 1.6 Pennsylvania 1.7 Tennessee 1.8 West Virginia 2 Historical US drift mining (gold) 2.1 Alaska 2.2 California 3 Historical drift mines in other countries 4 Drift mines in current production 5 Safety and environmental issues 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Historical US drift mining (coal)[edit] Coal miner standing in a drift portal at Fork Mountain, Tennessee, 1920. This section provides a very abbreviated snapshot of the drift mining information generally available. Illinois[edit] Argyle Lake State Park's website says the Argyle Hollow (occupied by a lake since 1948) has been rich in coal, clay and limestone resources. Historically, individuals commonly opened and dug their own \"drift mines\" to supplement their income.[7] In Appalachia, small coal mining operations such as these were known as \"country bank\" or \"farmer\" coal mines, and usually produced only small quantities for local use.[8] Indiana[edit] The Lusk Mine, now in Turkey Run State Park, was in operation from the late 1800s through the late 1920s. Too small for commercial operation, the mine probably provided coal for the Lusk family and later for the park.[9] Kentucky[edit] In 1820 the first commercial mine in Kentucky, known as the \"McLean drift bank\" opened near the Green River and Paradise in Muhlenberg County.[10] In Drift, Kentucky, Beaver Coal & Mining Company was the most well known operator of mines, but there were other smaller mines (Floyd-Elkhorn Consolidated Collieries, Turner-Elkhorn Coal Company, etc.) as well.[11] Maryland[edit] Dorsey Coal Company's Ashby coal mine, a small drift mine probably in the Upper Freeport coal; and the mine of the Taylor-Offutt Coal Company near Oakland, MD.[12] Ohio[edit] In the 1880s, State Inspector of Mines, Andrew Roy, issued a report on the Mines and Mining Resources of Ohio,[13] which includes the following paragraphs: The capacity or output of the mines of the State varies greatly. Thick coals are capable of a greater daily output than thin seams, and as a general rule drift mines possess greater advantages for loading coal rapidly than shaft mining openings. In many of the mines of the great vein region of the Hocking valley the capacity is equal to 1,200 to 1,500 tons per day. In shaft mines 600 to 700 tons daily is regarded as a good output. The first ton of coal in a shaft mine 100 feet in depth and having a daily capacity of 600 tons frequently costs the mining adventurer upwards of $20,000 (1888), and cases are on record where owing to the extraordinary amount of water in sinking, $100,000 (1888) have been expended before coal was reached. Drift mines, as they require no machinery for pumping water and raising coal, cost less than half the amount required in shaft mining. Water is, however, an expensive item in drift mines opened on the dip slope of the coal, and underground hauling under such conditions is unusually costly. Drift mine entry in West Virginia, 1908. Photo by Lewis Hine. Pennsylvania[edit] Indiana County: Graff Drift Mines, near Blairsville. Commodore Mines, Nos. 1 & 3 (drift mines), No. 2 (slope mine), Green Twp. Empire \"F\" Mine (1910-?), Shanktown; a drift mine, mining the \"B\" coal seam, mining done by machine, owner Pioneer Coal Company, Clearfield. Empire \"M\" Mine (McKean Mine) (1906-?), a drift mine, non-gaseous, mining a 38\" thick seam of Lower Kittaning coal using compressed air machines; ventilation provided by an 8' Stine steam-powered fan, Clymer, PA. Rodkey Mine(1906-?), a drift mine, Clymer. Ernest Mine No. 2 (1903-1965), a drift mine, at Ernest, Rayne Twp., Indiana Co., PA.[14] Tennessee[edit] The Fork Mountain, TN, drift portal entered an 84-inch unnamed seam of coal (see picture above). Most coal seams in Tennessee were not this thick.[15] West Virginia[edit] Many, many references to and photographs of WV drift mines in the Scrapbook of Appalachian Coal Towns,[16] including Sprague, Kaymoor, Nuttallburg, Venus, Layland, Elverton, Casselman (aka Castleman), etc. Historical US drift mining (gold)[edit] Alaska[edit] Drift mining methods were used extensively to mine placer deposits during the early years (1899- ) of the Nome mining district. During summer, surface deposits could be worked, but some placer deposits were buried too deeply for surface placering. In addition, water to wash the gold from the placers was not available in the winter. Many miners tunneled into deep placer deposits, bringing out the high-grade gravels to be washed at the spring thaw. Most of the ground in Nome is permafrost. By drift mining, miners were able to recover much of the gold buried under the permafrost. Gold at Nome was concentrated in three ancient beach lines, now inshore, above sea level, and buried under roughly fifty feet of permafrost overlain by two feet of tundra. Gold was usually found on top of \"false bedrock,\" a layer of clay that occurred at the base of the beach or stream deposit. Miners initially sank shafts to prospect for the pay streaks by building a fire atop the permafrost, then as it melted, shoveling away the mud. The process would continue down to either a pay streak or bedrock. When gold was found drift mining began. Miners would tunnel horizontally from the bottom of their prospect shaft to follow the gold along the surface of the bedrock. The tunnels did not cave in because the ground was frozen. Miners discovered old underground beach and river gravels rich with gold. Around 1900 the population of Nome was more than twenty thousand, many of them drift miners. Nome's gold fields, appearing untouched from the surface, are honeycombed with tunnels left by the gold rush drift miners. Today's miners, prospecting with modern drilling equipment, sometimes hit old drifts; this was, and is, a technique copied from the Welsh coal miners of south Wales and is much more effective than using bell pits. California[edit] Gold has been mined from placer gold deposits up and down the state and in different types of environment. Initially, rich, easily discovered, surface and river placers were mined until about 1864. Hydraulic mines, using powerful water cannons to wash whole hillsides, were the chief sources of gold for the next 20 years. In 1884, Judge Lorenzo Sawyer issued a decree prohibiting the dumping of hydraulic mining debris into the Sacramento River, effectively eliminating large-scale hydraulic operations. For the next 14 years, drift mining placer gold deposits in buried Tertiary channels partially made up for the loss of placer gold production, but overall production declined. Production rose again with the advent of large-scale dredging. The first successful gold dredge was introduced on the lower Feather River near Oroville in 1898.[17] Historical drift mines in other countries[edit] This section is empty. You can help by adding to it. (December 2015) Drift mines in current production[edit] This section is empty. You can help by adding to it. (December 2015) Safety and environmental issues[edit] Profile of hillseam occurrence Drift mines in eastern Kentucky are subject to roof collapse due to hillseams, especially within 100 feet of the portal. In 1989 the U.S. Bureau of Mines published a study of eastern Kentucky drift mines as part of an ongoing research program to characterize the outcrop barrier zone. \"Hillseams\" were identified as the dominant geologic cause of roof instability unique to the outcrop barrier zone, with many roof fall injuries and fatalities attributed to them. Hillseam is the eastern Kentucky miners term for weather-enlarged tension joints that occur in shallow mine overburden where surface slopes are steep. Hillseams are most conspicuous within 200\u00a0ft laterally of a coalbed outcrop and under 300\u00a0ft or less of overburden. Hillseams form by stress relief, and therefore tend to parallel topographic contours and ridges. They can intersect at various angles, especially under the nose of a ridge, and create massive blocks or wedges of roof prone to failure. Examples of hillseams are described in both outcrop and in coal mine roof to establish their geologic character and contribution to roof failure.[18] See also[edit] Shaft mining Slope mining References[edit] ^ Paul W. Thrush, A Dictionary of Mining, Mineral, and Related Terms, US Bureau of Mines, 1968, p.350. ^ \"Glossary of Mining Terms.\" Kentucky Foundation, Coal and Energy Education Project. 1996. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coaleducation.org/glossary.htm> Archived October 5, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. ^ drift-mine. Dictionary.com. Dictionary.com Unabridged. Random House, Inc. <http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/drift-mine> (accessed: December 27, 2015). ^ Paul W. Thrush, A Dictionary of Mining, Mineral, and Related Terms, US Bureau of Mines, 1968, p.350. ^ \"Glossary of Mining Terms.\" Kentucky Foundation, Coal and Energy Education Project. 1996. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coaleducation.org/glossary.htm> Archived October 5, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. ^ \"Drift | Mining.\" Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica Online. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.britannica.com/technology/drift-mining>. ^ \"Argyle Lake State Park.\" About. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.dnr.illinois.gov/Parks/About/Pages/ArgyleLake.aspx>. ^ DellaMea, Chris. \"Upper Youghiogheny Coalfield.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/westmd/upperyough/upperyough.htm>. ^ \"Working in a Drift Mine.\" DNR Reclamation Posters. August 29, 2005. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.in.gov/dnr/reclamation/files/re-driftmine.pdf>. ^ \"Kentucky Coal Heritage.\" Kentucky Foundation, Coal and Energy Education Project. 1996. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coaleducation.org/coalhistory/default_H.htm> Archived December 29, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. ^ DellaMea, Chris. \"Eastern Kentucky Coalfields.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/eastky/elkhorn/elkhorn.htm>. ^ DellaMea, Chris. \"Upper Youghiogheny Coalfield.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/westmd/upperyough/upperyough.htm>. ^ Roy, Andrew. \"Mines and Mining Resources of Ohio.\" Mines and Mining Resources of Ohio. 1888. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~henryhowesbook/mines.html>. ^ Washlaski, Raymond, and Ryan Washlaski. \"Virtual Museum of Coal Mining in Western Pennsylvania.\" September 18, 2010. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://patheoldminer.rootsweb.ancestry.com/>. ^ DellaMea, Chris. \"Eastern Tennessee Coalfields.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/tennessee-coal-mines/tennessee-coal-mines.htm>. ^ \"A Scrapbook of Appalachian Coal Towns\" <http://www.coalcampusa.com/>. ^ Silva, Michael. \"Placer Gold Recovery Methods (SP87).\" California Department of Conservation Division of Mines and Geology. 1986. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.conservation.ca.gov/cgs/geologic_resources/gold/documents/sp87.pdf.[permanent dead link]> ^ Sames, Gary, and Noel Moebs. \"Hillseam Geology and Roof Instability near Outcrop in Eastern Kentucky Drift Mines.\" U.S. Bureau of Mines. 1989. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/10524/cdc_10524_DS1.pdf>. External links[edit] Sketches showing various mining methods \"A Scrapbook of Appalachian Coal Towns\" with many references to individual drift mines. vteMining techniquesSurface Open-pit Quarrying Strip Placer Dredging Hydraulic mining Mountaintop removal Sub-surfaceClasses Hard rock Soft rock Directions Drift Slope Shaft Bell pit Borehole Stoping Room and pillar Longwall Retreat Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Drift_mining&oldid=873209761\" Categories: Underground miningMining engineeringHidden categories: Webarchive template wayback linksAll articles with dead external linksArticles with dead external links from December 2016Articles with permanently dead external linksArticles with short descriptionAll accuracy disputesArticles with disputed statements from September 2018Articles to be expanded from December 2015All articles to be expandedArticles with empty sections from December 2015All articles with empty sectionsArticles using small message boxes Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces ArticleTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version Languages Simple English Edit links This page was last edited on 11 December 2018, at 19:45\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "Drift mining - Howling Pixel Howling Pixel Drift mining Drift mining is either the mining of an ore deposit by underground methods, or the working of coal seams accessed by adits driven into the surface outcrop of the coal bed.[1] A drift mine is an underground mine in which the entry or access is above water level and generally on the slope of a hill, driven horizontally into the ore seam.[2] Random House dictionary says the origin of the term \"drift mine\" is an Americanism, circa 1885\u20131890.[3] Drift is a more general mining term, meaning a near-horizontal passageway in a mine, following the bed (of coal, for instance) or vein of ore. A drift may or may not intersect the ground surface.[4] A drift follows the vein, as distinguished from a crosscut that intersects it, or a level or gallery, which may do either.[5] All horizontal or subhorizontal development openings made in a mine have the generic name of drift. These are simply tunnels made in the rock, with a size and shape depending on their use\u2014for example, haulage, ventilation, or exploration.[6] Historical US drift mining (coal)Coal miner standing in a drift portal at Fork Mountain, Tennessee, 1920. This section provides a very abbreviated snapshot of the drift mining information generally available. IllinoisArgyle Lake State Park's website says the Argyle Hollow (occupied by a lake since 1948) has been rich in coal, clay and limestone resources. Historically, individuals commonly opened and dug their own \"drift mines\" to supplement their income.[7] In Appalachia, small coal mining operations such as these were known as \"country bank\" or \"farmer\" coal mines, and usually produced only small quantities for local use.[8] IndianaThe Lusk Mine, now in Turkey Run State Park, was in operation from the late 1800s through the late 1920s. Too small for commercial operation, the mine probably provided coal for the Lusk family and later for the park.[9] KentuckyIn 1820 the first commercial mine in Kentucky, known as the \"McLean drift bank\" opened near the Green River and Paradise in Muhlenberg County.[10] In Drift, Kentucky, Beaver Coal & Mining Company was the most well known operator of mines, but there were other smaller mines (Floyd-Elkhorn Consolidated Collieries, Turner-Elkhorn Coal Company, etc.) as well.[11] MarylandDorsey Coal Company's Ashby coal mine, a small drift mine probably in the Upper Freeport coal; and the mine of the Taylor-Offutt Coal Company near Oakland, MD.[12] OhioIn the 1880s, State Inspector of Mines, Andrew Roy, issued a report on the Mines and Mining Resources of Ohio,[13] which includes the following paragraphs: The capacity or output of the mines of the State varies greatly. Thick coals are capable of a greater daily output than thin seams, and as a general rule drift mines possess greater advantages for loading coal rapidly than shaft mining openings. In many of the mines of the great vein region of the Hocking valley the capacity is equal to 1,200 to 1,500 tons per day. In shaft mines 600 to 700 tons daily is regarded as a good output. The first ton of coal in a shaft mine 100 feet in depth and having a daily capacity of 600 tons frequently costs the mining adventurer upwards of $20,000 (1888), and cases are on record where owing to the extraordinary amount of water in sinking, $100,000 (1888) have been expended before coal was reached. Drift mines, as they require no machinery for pumping water and raising coal, cost less than half the amount required in shaft mining. Water is, however, an expensive item in drift mines opened on the dip slope of the coal, and underground hauling under such conditions is unusually costly. Drift mine entry in West Virginia, 1908. Photo by Lewis Hine. PennsylvaniaIndiana County: Graff Drift Mines, near Blairsville. Commodore Mines, Nos. 1 & 3 (drift mines), No. 2 (slope mine), Green Twp. Empire \"F\" Mine (1910-?), Shanktown; a drift mine, mining the \"B\" coal seam, mining done by machine, owner Pioneer Coal Company, Clearfield. Empire \"M\" Mine (McKean Mine) (1906-?), a drift mine, non-gaseous, mining a 38\" thick seam of Lower Kittaning coal using compressed air machines; ventilation provided by an 8' Stine steam-powered fan, Clymer, PA. Rodkey Mine(1906-?), a drift mine, Clymer. Ernest Mine No. 2 (1903-1965), a drift mine, at Ernest, Rayne Twp., Indiana Co., PA.[14] TennesseeThe Fork Mountain, TN, drift portal entered an 84-inch unnamed seam of coal (see picture above). Most coal seams in Tennessee were not this thick.[15] West VirginiaMany, many references to and photographs of WV drift mines in the Scrapbook of Appalachian Coal Towns,[16] including Sprague, Kaymoor, Nuttallburg, Venus, Layland, Elverton, Casselman (aka Castleman), etc. Historical US drift mining (gold)AlaskaDrift mining methods were used extensively to mine placer deposits during the early years (1899- ) of the Nome mining district. During summer, surface deposits could be worked, but some placer deposits were buried too deeply for surface placering. In addition, water to wash the gold from the placers was not available in the winter. Many miners tunneled into deep placer deposits, bringing out the high-grade gravels to be washed at the spring thaw. Most of the ground in Nome is permafrost. By drift mining, miners were able to recover much of the gold buried under the permafrost. Gold at Nome was concentrated in three ancient beach lines, now inshore, above sea level, and buried under roughly fifty feet of permafrost overlain by two feet of tundra. Gold was usually found on top of \"false bedrock,\" a layer of clay that occurred at the base of the beach or stream deposit. Miners initially sank shafts to prospect for the pay streaks by building a fire atop the permafrost, then as it melted, shoveling away the mud. The process would continue down to either a pay streak or bedrock. When gold was found drift mining began. Miners would tunnel horizontally from the bottom of their prospect shaft to follow the gold along the surface of the bedrock. The tunnels did not cave in because the ground was frozen. Miners discovered old underground beach and river gravels rich with gold. Around 1900 the population of Nome was more than twenty thousand, many of them drift miners. Nome's gold fields, appearing untouched from the surface, are honeycombed with tunnels left by the gold rush drift miners. Today's miners, prospecting with modern drilling equipment, sometimes hit old drifts; this was, and is, a technique copied from the Welsh coal miners of south Wales and is much more effective than using bell pits. CaliforniaGold has been mined from placer gold deposits up and down the state and in different types of environment. Initially, rich, easily discovered, surface and river placers were mined until about 1864. Hydraulic mines, using powerful water cannons to wash whole hillsides, were the chief sources of gold for the next 20 years. In 1884, Judge Lorenzo Sawyer issued a decree prohibiting the dumping of hydraulic mining debris into the Sacramento River, effectively eliminating large-scale hydraulic operations. For the next 14 years, drift mining placer gold deposits in buried Tertiary channels partially made up for the loss of placer gold production, but overall production declined. Production rose again with the advent of large-scale dredging. The first successful gold dredge was introduced on the lower Feather River near Oroville in 1898.[17] Safety and environmental issuesProfile of hillseam occurrence Drift mines in eastern Kentucky are subject to roof collapse due to hillseams, especially within 100 feet of the portal. In 1989 the U.S. Bureau of Mines published a study of eastern Kentucky drift mines as part of an ongoing research program to characterize the outcrop barrier zone. \"Hillseams\" were identified as the dominant geologic cause of roof instability unique to the outcrop barrier zone, with many roof fall injuries and fatalities attributed to them. Hillseam is the eastern Kentucky miners term for weather-enlarged tension joints that occur in shallow mine overburden where surface slopes are steep. Hillseams are most conspicuous within 200\u00a0ft laterally of a coalbed outcrop and under 300\u00a0ft or less of overburden. Hillseams form by stress relief, and therefore tend to parallel topographic contours and ridges. They can intersect at various angles, especially under the nose of a ridge, and create massive blocks or wedges of roof prone to failure. Examples of hillseams are described in both outcrop and in coal mine roof to establish their geologic character and contribution to roof failure.[18] See alsoShaft mining Slope miningReferences ^ Paul W. Thrush, A Dictionary of Mining, Mineral, and Related Terms, US Bureau of Mines, 1968, p.350. ^ \"Glossary of Mining Terms.\" Kentucky Foundation, Coal and Energy Education Project. 1996. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coaleducation.org/glossary.htm> Archived October 5, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. ^ drift-mine. Dictionary.com. Dictionary.com Unabridged. Random House, Inc. <http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/drift-mine> (accessed: December 27, 2015). ^ Paul W. Thrush, A Dictionary of Mining, Mineral, and Related Terms, US Bureau of Mines, 1968, p.350. ^ \"Glossary of Mining Terms.\" Kentucky Foundation, Coal and Energy Education Project. 1996. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coaleducation.org/glossary.htm> Archived October 5, 2014, at the Wayback Machine. ^ \"Drift | Mining.\" Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica Online. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.britannica.com/technology/drift-mining>. ^ \"Argyle Lake State Park.\" About. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.dnr.illinois.gov/Parks/About/Pages/ArgyleLake.aspx>. ^ DellaMea, Chris. \"Upper Youghiogheny Coalfield.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/westmd/upperyough/upperyough.htm>. ^ \"Working in a Drift Mine.\" DNR Reclamation Posters. August 29, 2005. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.in.gov/dnr/reclamation/files/re-driftmine.pdf>. ^ \"Kentucky Coal Heritage.\" Kentucky Foundation, Coal and Energy Education Project. 1996. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coaleducation.org/coalhistory/default_H.htm> Archived December 29, 2015, at the Wayback Machine. ^ DellaMea, Chris. \"Eastern Kentucky Coalfields.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/eastky/elkhorn/elkhorn.htm>. ^ DellaMea, Chris. \"Upper Youghiogheny Coalfield.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/westmd/upperyough/upperyough.htm>. ^ Roy, Andrew. \"Mines and Mining Resources of Ohio.\" Mines and Mining Resources of Ohio. 1888. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~henryhowesbook/mines.html>. ^ Washlaski, Raymond, and Ryan Washlaski. \"Virtual Museum of Coal Mining in Western Pennsylvania.\" September 18, 2010. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://patheoldminer.rootsweb.ancestry.com/>. ^ DellaMea, Chris. \"Eastern Tennessee Coalfields.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/tennessee-coal-mines/tennessee-coal-mines.htm>. ^ \"A Scrapbook of Appalachian Coal Towns\" <http://www.coalcampusa.com/>. ^ Silva, Michael. \"Placer Gold Recovery Methods (SP87).\" California Department of Conservation Division of Mines and Geology. 1986. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.conservation.ca.gov/cgs/geologic_resources/gold/documents/sp87.pdf.> ^ Sames, Gary, and Noel Moebs. \"Hillseam Geology and Roof Instability near Outcrop in Eastern Kentucky Drift Mines.\" U.S. Bureau of Mines. 1989. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/10524/cdc_10524_DS1.pdf>. External linksSketches showing various mining methods \"A Scrapbook of Appalachian Coal Towns\" with many references to individual drift mines. Addie Camp, South Dakota Addie Camp, also known as Kennedyville, Addie Spur, or Canadaville (USGS maps only), is a ghost town located in Pennington County, South Dakota, United States. It was a mining camp in the Black Hills. Adit An adit (from Latin aditus, entrance) is an entrance to an underground mine which is horizontal or nearly horizontal, by which the mine can be entered, drained of water, ventilated, and minerals extracted at the lowest convenient level. Adits are also used to explore for mineral veins. Andrew Roy Andrew Roy may refer to:Drew Roy, Andrew Roy, actorAndrew Roy (sailor), in Laser World ChampionshipsAndrew Roy (figure skater) in Australian Figure Skating ChampionshipsAndrew Roy, (1880s) Ohio State Inspector of Mines, Drift mining Bell pit A bell pit is a primitive method of mining coal, iron ore or other minerals where the coal or ore lies near the surface. Blue Tent, California Blue Tent is a historic 19th century gold mining community located about six miles northeast of Nevada City, California.Its approximate location is at the intersection of N. Bloomfield Road and Blue Tent School Road. It was part of Nevada Township. Clarence Berry Clarence Jesse Berry (1867\u20131930), known as C.J., was a businessman and successful gold miner in the Klondike Gold Rush. He and his wife, Ethel Bush Berry, made a further fortune in Ester, Alaska, in 1902, and founded several oil companies over the years, which eventually became Berry Petroleum Company.In Ester, Berry pioneered the use of the cold water point and the steam point, used to thaw frozen soil and permafrost in a safer manner for drift mining than boring shafts using hot rocks or underground fires, which rendered the excavations and tunnels far more susceptible to collapse. The Berrys operated No. 8 Below Discovery Claim. Clifton, West Yorkshire Clifton is a small village, near Brighouse, in the metropolitan borough of Calderdale in West Yorkshire, England. East Chevington East Chevington is a parish in Northumberland, England, and was a village until it disappeared in the 1900s.In 2001, the parish had a population of 3,192, increasing to 3,951 at the 2011 Census. Hetton-le-Hole Hetton-le-Hole is a town and civil parish situated in the City of Sunderland, Tyne and Wear, England. Historically in County Durham, it is on the A182 between Houghton-le-Spring and Easington Lane, at the southwest corner of Sunderland, off the A690 and close to the A1(M). It has a population of 14,402 including the village of Easington Lane and Warden Law.The civil parish includes Hetton proper, along with East Rainton, Middle Rainton (but not West Rainton which is a separate parish), Low Moorsley, High Moorsley and Easington Lane. South Hetton is a separate parish.Great Eppleton Wind Farm, a wind farm originally of four dual-bladed alternators, provides electricity to the National Grid. The original wind turbines have been replaced by larger three-bladed versions. The turbines are far enough away from local houses not to cause any audible disturbance. Lethbridge Lethbridge is a city in the province of Alberta, Canada, and the largest city in southern Alberta. It is Alberta's fourth-largest city by population after Calgary, Edmonton and Red Deer, and the third-largest by land area after Calgary and Edmonton. The nearby Canadian Rockies contribute to the city's warm summers, mild winters, and windy climate. Lethbridge lies southeast of Calgary on the Oldman River.Lethbridge is the commercial, financial, transportation and industrial centre of southern Alberta. The city's economy developed from drift mining for coal in the late 19th century and agriculture in the early 20th century. Half of the workforce is employed in the health, education, retail and hospitality sectors, and the top five employers are government-based. The only university in Alberta south of Calgary is in Lethbridge, and two of the three colleges in southern Alberta have campuses in the city. Cultural venues in the city include performing art theatres, museums and sports centres. Limb Brook The Limb Brook is a stream in Sheffield, South Yorkshire, England. It rises at the village of Ringinglow, flowing east through Whirlow and Ecclesall Woods into Abbeydale in the Beauchief area, where it merges with the River Sheaf. Near this point part of the stream has been diverted to provide the goit for the Abbeydale Industrial Hamlet millpond, and this channel flows through what is now Beauchief Gardens. Mining in Wales Mining in Wales provided a significant source of income to the economy of Wales throughout the nineteenth century and early twentieth century. It was key to the Industrial Revolution.Wales was famous for its coal mining, in the Rhondda Valley, the South Wales Valleys and throughout the South Wales coalfield and by 1913 Barry had become the largest coal exporting port in the world, with Cardiff as second, as coal was transported down by rail. Northeast Wales also had its own coalfield and Tower Colliery (closed January 2008) near Hirwaun is regarded by many as the oldest open coal mine and one of the largest in the world. Wales has also had a significant history of mining for slate, gold and various metal ores. Ogmore Vale Ogmore Vale (Welsh: Cwm Ogwr) is a village in the county borough of Bridgend, Wales on the River Ogmore. The village's main source of income came from coal mining. Up until the year 1865, the Ogmore valley was a quiet, isolated, rural hill farming community of less than ten farms and a few cottages. Today, along with Nantymoel and Price Town it makes up the community of Ogmore Valley. Pittsburg-Weir Coalfield The Pittsburg-Weir Coalfield, also known as Weir-Pittsburg Coalfield and Cherokee Coalfield, is a coalfield located in Cherokee and Crawford counties in the southeast corner of Kansas.The first underground shaft mine was built in the region in 1874 near Scammon. Prior to that, there was scattered small-scale drift mining and surface mining of coal, but the construction of the first shaft mine ushered in an era which eventually led to as many as 290 significant mines and numerous other small (\"dinky\") mines in the two counties. The most active period of mining in the region was 1890-1910, and most of the coal camps were dismantled by the 1930s or 1940s. Mechanized strip mining overtook underground mining in output in 1931, and that combined with competition from eastern coal led to a demise in importance of underground mining in the region. Placer deposit In geology, a placer deposit or placer is an accumulation of valuable minerals formed by gravity separation from a specific source rock during sedimentary processes. The name is from the Spanish word placer, meaning \"alluvial sand\". Placer mining is an important source of gold, and was the main technique used in the early years of many gold rushes, including the California Gold Rush. Types of placer deposits include alluvium, eluvium, beach placers, and paleoplacers.Placer materials must be both dense and resistant to weathering processes. To accumulate in placers, mineral particles must be significantly denser than quartz (whose specific gravity is 2.65), as quartz is usually the largest component of sand or gravel. Placer environments typically contain black sand, a conspicuous shiny black mixture of iron oxides, mostly magnetite with variable amounts of ilmenite and hematite. Valuable mineral components often occurring with black sands are monazite, rutile, zircon, chromite, wolframite, and cassiterite. Remington Hill, California Remington Hill is a historic mining camp in Nevada County, California which prospered in the second half of the 19th century. It was named for Caleb Remington, a prominent local miner who lived mostly in neighboring Little York, where he died in 1865. It lay at an elevation of 4052 feet (1235 m). It was situated around present Chalk Bluff Road about one mile south of Highway 20 and about 5.5 miles southeast of the town of Washington and 6 miles northeast of Dutch Flat, as the crow flies. Ringinglow Ringinglow is a village in the western section of Sheffield, England. It is on the western border of Ecclesall Ward, and although it is within the boundary of Sheffield, it is self-contained, being entirely surrounded by open countryside. The village now falls within the Fulwood ward of the City. The village is focussed on the intersections of Fulwood Lane and Sheephill Road (historically this section was known as Houndkirk Road) with Ringinglow Road. The sources of the Porter Brook and Limb Brook, both tributaries of the River Sheaf, are near the village. The Norfolk Arms, a pub in the village, is often used as a staging-post by ramblers following one of these rivers out of Sheffield towards the Peak District National Park, the eastern boundary of which runs through the village. Techatticup Mine Techatticup Mine, is a former gold mine, now a tourist attraction. It is located at an elevation of 2,477 feet (755 m), midway in Eldorado Canyon, in Clark County, Nevada. You Bet, California You Bet is a small unincorporated community in Nevada County, California. You Bet is located in the Sierra Nevada foothills, 7 miles (11.3 km) east of Grass Valley and 5.5 miles (8.9 km) northeast of Chicago Park.Mining techniquesSurface Open-pit Quarrying Strip Placer Dredging Hydraulic mining Mountaintop removal Sub-surfaceClasses Hard rock Soft rock Directions Drift Slope Shaft Bell pit Borehole Stoping Room and pillar Longwall Retreat This page is based on a Wikipedia article written by authors (here). Text is available under the CC BY-SA 3.0 license; additional terms may apply. Images, videos and audio are available under their respective licenses. Privacy Terms of Use Contact About \u00a9 2019 Howling Pixel", "Drift mining - Infogalactic: the planetary knowledge core Drift mining From Infogalactic: the planetary knowledge core Jump to:\t\t\t\t\tnavigation, \t\t\t\t\tsearch Drift mining is either the mining of an ore deposit by underground methods, or the working of coal seams accessed by adits driven into the surface outcrop of the coal bed.[1] A Drift Mine is an underground mine in which the entry or access is above water level and generally on the slope of a hill, driven horizontally into the ore seam.[2] Random House dictionary says the origin of the term \"drift mine\" is an Americanism, circa 1885-1890.[3] Drift is a more general mining term, meaning a near-horizontal passageway in a mine, following the bed (of coal, for instance) or vein of ore. A drift may or may not intersect the ground surface.[4] A Drift is a horizontal passage underground. A drift follows the vein, as distinguished from a crosscut that intersects it, or a level or gallery, which may do either.[5] All horizontal or subhorizontal development openings made in a mine have the generic name of drift. These are simply tunnels made in the rock, with a size and shape depending on their use\u2014for example, haulage, ventilation, or exploration.[6] Contents 1 Historical US drift mining (coal) 2 Historical US drift mining (gold) 3 Historical drift mines in other countries 4 Drift mines in current production 5 Safety and environmental issues 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Historical US drift mining (coal) Coal miner standing in a drift portal at Fork Mountain, TN, 1920. This section provides a very abbreviated snapshot of the drift mining information generally available. Illinois: Argyle Lake State Park's website says the Argyle Hollow (occupied by a lake since 1948) region has been rich in coal, clay and limestone resources. Historically, individuals commonly opened and dug their own \"drift mines\" to supplement their income.[7] In Appalachia, small coal mining operations such as these were known as \"country bank\" or \"farmer\" coal mines, and usually produced only small quantities for local use.[8] Indiana: The Lusk Mine, now in Turkey Run State Park, was in operation from the late 1800s through the late 1920s. Too small for commercial operation, the mine probably provided coal for the Lusk family and later for the park.[9] Kentucky: In 1820 the first commercial mine in Kentucky, known as the \"McLean drift bank\" opened near the Green River and Paradise in Muhlenberg County.[10] In Drift, KY, Beaver Coal & Mining Company was the most well known operator of mines, but there were other smaller mines (Floyd-Elkhorn Consolidated Collieries, Turner-Elkhorn Coal Company, etc.) as well.[11] Maryland: Dorsey Coal Company's Ashby coal mine, a small drift mine probably in the Upper Freeport coal; and the mine of the Taylor-Offutt Coal Company near Oakland, MD.[12] Ohio: In the 1880s, State Inspector of Mines, Andrew Roy, issued a report on the The Mines and Mining Resources of Ohio,[13] which includes the following paragraphs: The capacity or output of the mines of the State varies greatly. Thick coals are capable of a greater daily output than thin seams, and as a general rule drift mines possess greater advantages for loading coal rapidly than shaft openings. In many of the mines of the great vein region of the Hocking valley the capacity is equal to 1,200 to 1,500 tons per day. In shaft mines 600 to 700 tons daily is regarded as a good output. The first ton of coal in a shaft mine 100 feet in depth and having a daily capacity of 600 tons frequently costs the mining adventurer upwards of $20,000 (1888), and cases are on record where owing to the extraordinary amount of water in sinking, $100,000 (1888) have been expended before coal was reached. Drift mines, as they require no machinery for pumping water and raising coal, cost less than half the amount required in shaft mining. Water is, however, an expensive item in drift mines opened on the dip of the coal, and underground hauling under such conditions is unusually costly.[14] Drift mine entry in West Virginia, 1908. Photo by Lewis Hine. Pennsylvania: Indiana County: Graff Drift Mines, near Blairsville. Commodore Mines, Nos. 1 & 3 (drift mines), No. 2 (slope mine), Green Twp. Empire \"F\" Mine (1910-?), Shanktown; a drift mine, mining the \"B\" coal seam, mining done by machine, owner Pioneer Coal Company, Clearfield. Empire \"M\" Mine (McKean Mine) (1906-?), a drift mine, non-gaseous, mining a 38\" thick seam of Lower Kittaning coal using compressed air machines; ventilation provided by a 8' Stine steam-powered fan, Clymer, PA. Rodkey Mine(1906-?), a drift mine, Clymer. Ernest Mine No. 2 (1903-1965), a drift mine, at Ernest, Rayne Twp., Indiana Co., PA.[15] Tennessee: The Fork Mountain, TN, drift portal entered an 84-inch unnamed seam of coal (see picture). Most coal seams in Tennessee were not this thick.[16] West Virginia: Many, many references to and photographs of WV drift mines in the Scrapbook of Appalachian Coal Towns,[17] including Sprague, Kaymoor, Nuttallburg, Venus, Layland, Elverton, Casselman (aka Castleman), etc. Historical US drift mining (gold) Alaska: Drift mining methods were used extensively to mine placer deposits during the early years (1899- ) of the Nome mining district. During summer, surface deposits could be worked, but some placer deposits were buried too deeply for surface placering. In addition, water to wash the gold from the placers was not available in the winter. Many miners tunneled into deep placer deposits, bringing out the high-grade gravels to be washed at the spring thaw. Most of the ground in Nome is permafrost. By drift mining, miners were able to recover much of the gold buried under the permafrost. Gold at Nome was concentrated in three ancient beach lines, now inshore, above sea level, and buried under roughly fifty feet of permafrost overlain by two feet of tundra. Gold was usually found on top of \"false bedrock,\" a layer of clay that occurred at the base of the beach or stream deposit. Miners initially sank shafts to prospect for the pay streaks by building a fire atop the permafrost, then as it melted, shoveling away the mud. The process would continue down to either a pay streak or bedrock. When gold was found drift mining began. Miners would tunnel horizontally from the bottom of their prospect shaft to follow the gold along the surface of the bedrock. The tunnels did not cave in because the ground was frozen. Miners discovered old underground beach and river gravels rich with gold. Around 1900 the population of Nome was more than twenty thousand, many of them drift miners. Nome's gold fields, appearing untouched from the surface, are honeycombed with tunnels left by the gold rush drift miners. Today's miners, prospecting with modern drilling equipment, sometimes hit old drifts; this was, and is, a technique copied from the Welsh coal miners of south Wales and is much more effective than using bell pits. California: Gold has been mined from placer gold deposits up and down the state and in different types of environment. Initially, rich, easily discovered, surface and river placers were mined until about 1864. Hydraulic mines, using powerful water cannons to wash whole hillsides, were the chief sources of gold for the next 20 years. In 1884, Judge Lorenzo Sawyer issued a decree prohibiting the dumping of hydraulic mining debris into the Sacramento River, effectively eliminating large-scale hydraulic operations. For the next 14 years, drift mining placer gold deposits in buried Tertiary channels partially made up for the loss of placer gold production, but overall production declined. Production rose again with the advent of large-scale dredging. The first successful gold dredge was introduced on the lower Feather River near Oroville in 1898.[18] Historical drift mines in other countries This section is empty. You can help by adding to it. (December 2015) Drift mines in current production This section is empty. You can help by adding to it. (December 2015) Safety and environmental issues Profile of hillseam occurrence Drift mines in eastern Kentucky are subject to roof collapse due to hillseams, especially within 100 feet of the portal. In 1989 the U.S. Bureau of Mines published a study of eastern Kentucky drift mines as part of an ongoing research program to characterize the outcrop barrier zone. \"Hillseams\" were identified as the dominant geologic cause of roof instability unique to the outcrop barrier zone, with many roof fall injuries and fatalities attributed to them. Hillseam is the eastern Kentucky miners term for weather-enlarged tension joints that occur in shallow mine overburden where surface slopes are steep. Hillseams are most conspicuous within 200\u00a0ft laterally of a coalbed outcrop and under 300\u00a0ft or less of overburden. Hillseams form by stress relief, and therefore tend to parallel topographic contours and ridges. They can intersect at various angles, especially under the nose of a ridge, and create massive blocks or wedges of roof prone to failure. Examples of hillseams are described in both outcrop and in coal mine roof to establish their geologic character and contribution to roof failure.[19] See also Shaft mining Slope mining References \u2191 Paul W. Thrush, A Dictionary of Mining, Mineral, and Related Terms, US Bureau of Mines, 1968, p.350. \u2191 \"Glossary of Mining Terms.\" Kentucky Foundation, Coal and Energy Education Project. 1996. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coaleducation.org/glossary.htm>. \u2191 drift-mine. Dictionary.com. Dictionary.com Unabridged. Random House, Inc. <http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/drift-mine> (accessed: December 27, 2015). \u2191 Paul W. Thrush, A Dictionary of Mining, Mineral, and Related Terms, US Bureau of Mines, 1968, p.350. \u2191 \"Glossary of Mining Terms.\" Kentucky Foundation, Coal and Energy Education Project. 1996. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coaleducation.org/glossary.htm>. \u2191 \"Drift | Mining.\" Encyclopedia Britannica Online. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.britannica.com/technology/drift-mining>. \u2191 \"Argyle Lake State Park.\" About. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.dnr.illinois.gov/Parks/About/Pages/ArgyleLake.aspx>. \u2191 DellaMea, Chris. \"Upper Youghiogheny Coalfield.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/westmd/upperyough/upperyough.htm>. \u2191 \"Working in a Drift Mine.\" DNR Reclamation Posters. August 29, 2005. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.in.gov/dnr/reclamation/files/re-driftmine.pdf>. \u2191 \"Kentucky Coal Heritage.\" Kentucky Foundation, Coal and Energy Education Project. 1996. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coaleducation.org/coalhistory/default_H.htm>. \u2191 DellaMea, Chris. \"Eastern Kentucky Coalfields.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/eastky/elkhorn/elkhorn.htm>. \u2191 DellaMea, Chris. \"Upper Youghiogheny Coalfield.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/westmd/upperyough/upperyough.htm>. \u2191 Roy, Andrew. \"Mines and Mining Resources of Ohio.\" Mines and Mining Resources of Ohio. 1888. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~henryhowesbook/mines.html>. \u2191 Roy, Andrew. \"Mines and Mining Resources of Ohio.\" Mines and Mining Resources of Ohio. 1888. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://freepages.genealogy.rootsweb.ancestry.com/~henryhowesbook/mines.html>. \u2191 Washlaski, Raymond, and Ryan Washlaski. \"Virtual Museum of Coal Mining in Western Pennsylvania.\" September 18, 2010. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://patheoldminer.rootsweb.ancestry.com/>. \u2191 DellaMea, Chris. \"Eastern Tennessee Coalfields.\" Coalfields of the Appalachian Mountains. November 1, 2006. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.coalcampusa.com/tennessee-coal-mines/tennessee-coal-mines.htm>. \u2191 \"A Scrapbook of Appalachian Coal Towns\" <http://www.coalcampusa.com/>. \u2191 Silva, Michael. \"Placer Gold Recovery Methods (SP87).\" California Department of Conservation Division of Mines and Geology. 1986. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://www.conservation.ca.gov/cgs/geologic_resources/gold/documents/sp87.pdf.> \u2191 Sames, Gary, and Noel Moebs. \"Hillseam Geology and Roof Instability near Outcrop in Eastern Kentucky Drift Mines.\" U.S. Bureau of Mines. 1989. Accessed December 28, 2015. <http://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/10524/cdc_10524_DS1.pdf>. External links Sketches showing various mining methods \"A Scrapbook of Appalachian Coal Towns\" with many references to individual drift mines. v t e Mining techniques Surface Open-pit Quarrying Strip Placer Dredging Hydraulic mining Mountaintop removal Sub-surface Classes Hard rock Soft rock Directions Drift Slope Shaft Bell pit Borehole Stoping Room and pillar Longwall Retreat Retrieved from \"https://infogalactic.com/w/index.php?title=Drift_mining&oldid=4491268\" Categories: Articles to be expanded from December 2015Articles with empty sections from December 2015All articles with empty sectionsArticles using small message boxesUnderground miningMining engineeringHidden category: All articles to be expanded Navigation menu Personal tools Log inRequest account Namespaces Page Discussion Variants Views Read View source View history More Search Navigation Main pageRecent changesRandom pageHelpInfogalactic NewsBuy an account Tools What links hereRelated changesSpecial pagesPrintable versionPermanent linkPage informationCite this page This page was last modified on 29 December 2015, at 09:36. Content is available under Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License unless otherwise noted. This article's content derived from Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia (See original source). Privacy policy About Infogalactic: the planetary knowledge core Disclaimers Mobile view", "What Do the Weather Terms Mean? Menutimeanddate.comSearch \u00d7Site / ArticlesCity / CountrySocial \u00d7Share this page / Follow us on:FacebookTweetFollowTwitterVisit us on:FacebookTwitter BackMy accountMy LocationMy UnitsMy EventsMy World ClockMy PrivacyPaid ServicesSign inRegisterBackHomeNewsletterAbout UsSite MapAccount/SettingsArticle TopicsBackWorld ClockMain World ClockExtended World ClockPersonal World ClockWorld Time Lookup Time ArticlesBackTime ZonesTime Zone ConverterInternational Meeting PlannerEvent Time AnnouncerTime Zone MapTime Zone AbbreviationsTime Zone NewsDaylight Saving TimeTime Changes WorldwideTime DifferenceTime Zone ArticlesBackCalendarCalendar InfoCalendar 2019Calendar 2020Monthly CalendarPrintable Calendar (PDF)Add Your Own Calendar EventsCalendar CreatorAdvanced Calendar CreatorHolidays WorldwideOn This Day in HistoryCalendar ArticlesBackWeatherWorldwideLocal Weather2-Week ForecastHour-by-HourPast WeekClimateBackSun & MoonSun CalculatorMoon CalculatorMoon PhasesSeasonsEclipsesNight SkyDay and Night MapMoon Light World MapMeteor ShowersAstronomy ArticlesBackTimersStopwatchTimerCountdown to Any DateNew Year CountdownNew Year TriviaBackCalculatorsDate to Date Calculator (duration)Business Date to Date (exclude holidays)Date Calculator (add / subtract)Business Date (exclude holidays)International Dialing CodesDistance CalculatorDistance SignpostTravel Time CalculatorWeekday CalculatorWeek Number CalculatorBackApps & APIiOS AppsAndroid AppsWindows AppFree ClockFree CountdownAPI for DevelopersBackFree FunFree Clock for Your SiteFree Countdown for Your SiteWord ClockFun HolidaysAlternative Age CalculatorDate Pattern CalculatorFun Fact ArticlesHome \u00a0 Weather \u00a0 Weather Glossary \u2013 Terms & DefinitionsWeather Glossary \u2013 Terms & DefinitionsTerminology used in weather reports, forecasts, and readings. Names and words used to describe the weather and climate.Forecasts, past weather, and climate information for your locationA | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P | Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | ZTopAcid rainCloud or rain droplets containing pollutants, such as oxides of sulfur and nitrogen, to make them acidic (eg. pH < 5.6).AfternoonNoon to sunset.Arctic airA mass of very cold, dry air that usually originates over the Arctic Ocean north of Canada and Alaska.Arctic highA very cold high pressure that originates over the Arctic Ocean.TopBall lightningA relatively rarely seen form of lightning, generally consisting of an orange or reddish ball of the order of a few cm to 30cm in diameter and of moderate luminosity, which may move up to 1 m/s horizontally with a lifetime of a second or two.Barber poleA thunderstorm updraft with a visual appearance including cloud striations that are curved in a manner similar to the stripes of a barber pole. The structure typically is most pronounced on the leading edge of the updraft, while drier air from the rear flank downdraft often erodes the clouds on the trailing side of the updraft.BarometerAn instrument for measuring atmospheric pressure.Barometric pressureThe actual pressure value indicated by a pressure sensor.Bitterly coldIn winter, bitterly cold or very cold, refers to more than seven degrees Celsius below normal.Black iceThin, new ice that forms on fresh water or dew covered surfaces; it is common on roadways during the fall and early winter and appears \"black\" because of its transparency.BlizzardIncludes winter storm conditions of sustained winds or frequent gusts of 35 mph or more that cause major blowing and drifting of snow, reducing visibility to less than one-quarter mile for 3 or more hours. Extremely cold temperatures often are associated with dangerous blizzard conditions. In Canada, a blizzard described as a severe storm that lasts three or more hours, and brings low temperatures, strong winds and poor visibility due to blowing snow. In Australia, it is described as a violent and very cold wind which is loaded with snow, some of which has been raised from snow covered ground.Blocking highA high pressure area (anticyclone), often aloft, that remains nearly stationary or moves slowly compared to west-to-east motion. It blocks the movement eastward movement of low pressure areas (cyclones) at its latitude.Blowing DustDust that is raised by the wind to moderate heights above the ground to a degree that horizontal visibility decreases to less than seven miles. Visibilities of 1/8 mile or less over a widespread area are criteria for a Blowing Dust Advisory.Blowing sandSand particles picked up from the surface of the earth by the wind to moderate heights above the ground, reducing the reported horizontal visibility to less than seven statute miles.Blowing snowWind driven snow that reduces visibility to six miles or less causing significant drifting. Blowing snow may be snow that is falling and/or loose snow on the ground picked up by the wind. In Canada, it is described as snow that is lifted by the wind from the earth's surface to a height of two meters or more.Blowing sprayWater droplets torn by the wind from a body of water, generally from the crests of waves, and carried up into the air in such quantities that they reduce the reported horizontal visibility to less than seven statute miles.BlusteryDescriptive term for gusty winds that accompany cold weather.BreezyWind in the range of 15 miles per hour to 25 mile per hour with mild or warm temperatures.BriskWind in the range of 15 to 25 miles per hour when the temperature is cold.Broken cloudsClouds which cover between 5/8ths and 7/8ths of the sky.TopCalmThe absence of apparent motion in the air.CelsiusA temperature scale in which zero is the freezing point of water and one hundred is the boiling point.ChinookA Chinook is a warm, dry, gusty wind that occasionally occurs to the leeward side of a mountain range, particularly the Rocky Mountains.Cirrus cloudHigh cloud, delicate, hair-like and feathery looking.ClearSky condition of less than 1/10 cloud coverage.\tIn the United Kingdom, clear is defined as \u201cNo cloud\u201d, and in Australia, it is defined as \u201cVirtually cloud-free\u201d.Clear slotA local region of clearing skies or reduced cloud cover, indicating an intrusion of drier air; often seen as a bright area with higher cloud bases on the west or southwest side of a wall cloud.ClimateThe prevalent long term weather conditions in a particular area. Climatic elements include precipitation, temperature, humidity, sunshine and wind velocity and phenomena such as fog, frost, and hail storms. Climate cannot be considered a satisfactory indicator of actual conditions since it is based upon a vast number of elements taken as an average.CloudburstA sudden, intense rainfall that is normally of short duration.CloudyCloudy means that clouds cover more than 60 percent of the sky.Coastal flood warningIssued when there is widespread coastal flooding expected within 12 hours, more than just a typical overwash.ColdIn the winter, cold refers to four to seven degrees Celsius below normal.Cold Advection (CAA)Transport of cold air into a region by horizontal winds.Cold frontA narrow transition zone separating advancing colder air from retreating warmer air. The air behind a cold front is cooler and typically drier than the air it is replacing.Cold lowA low pressure system with cold air mass from near the surface to all vertical levels (also called a cold core low).Cold-air-funnelA funnel cloud or (rarely) a small, relatively weak tornado that can develop from a small shower or thunderstorm when the air aloft is unusually cold (hence the name). They are much less violent than other types of tornadoes.Collar cloudFrequently used as a synonym for wall cloud, although it actually is a generally circular ring of cloud surrounding the upper portion of a wall cloud.Combined seasThe combined height of swell and wind waves.CondensationThe process by which water vapor becomes a liquid; the opposite of evaporation, which is the conversion of liquid to vapor. In Australia, it is described as a change from a gas to a liquid.ConfluenceA pattern of wind flow in which air flows inward toward an axis oriented parallel to the general direction of flow. It is the opposite of difluence. Confluence is not the same as convergence. Winds often accelerate as they enter a confluent zone, resulting in speed divergence which offsets the (apparent) converging effect of the confluent flow.Congestus (or Cumulus congestus)A large cumulus cloud with great vertical development, usually with a cauliflower-like appearance, but lacking the characteristic anvil shaped top of a Cb (Cumulonimbus cloud).Continental air massA dry air mass originating over a large land area.ConvectionThe transfer of heat within the air by its movement. The term is used specifically to describe vertical transport of heat and moisture, especially by updrafts and downdrafts in an unstable atmosphere.ConvergenceAn atmospheric condition that exists when the winds cause a horizontal net inflow of air into a specified region. Divergence is the opposite, where winds cause a horizontal net outflow of air from a specified region.Cumulonimbus CloudA vertically developed cloud, often capped by an anvil shaped cloud. Also called a thunderstorm cloud, it is frequently accompanied by heavy showers, lightning, thunder, and sometimes hail or gusty winds. In Australia, it is described as a heavy, puffy, heaped, dark cloud of great vertical depth, often bringing rain. Some have a distinctive anvil shaped head. Cumulus cloudA cloud in the shape of individual detached domes, with a flat base and a bulging upper portion resembling cauliflower. In Australia, it is described as a cloud with a woolly, heaped appearance that often produces rain. Cumulus congestusA large cumulus cloud with great vertical development, usually with a cauliflower-like appearance, but lacking the characteristic anvil shaped top of a Cb (Cumulonimbus cloud).CycloneAn area of low pressure around which winds blow counterclockwise in the Northern Hemisphere. Also the term used for a hurricane in the Indian Ocean and in the Western Pacific Ocean. In Australia, it is described as atmospheric circulations that rotate clockwise in the southern hemisphere, and anti-clockwise in the northern hemisphere. Cyclones are areas of lower pressure and generally associated with stronger winds, unsettled conditions, cloudiness and rainfall.TopDaySunrise to sunset. Day of the week (eg. Monday)Midnight to midnight.Debris cloudA rotating \"cloud\" of dust or debris, near or on the ground, often appearing beneath a condensation funnel and surrounding the base of a tornado.Dense fogA fog in which the visibility is less than one-quarter mile.DepressionA region of low atmospheric pressure that is usually accompanied by low clouds and precipitation.Dew pointThe temperature to which the air must be cooled for water vapor to condense and form fog or clouds.Diamond dustA fall of non-branched (snow crystals are branched) ice crystals in the form of needles, columns, or plates.DifluenceA pattern of wind flow in which air moves outward (in a \"fan-out\" pattern) away from a central axis that is oriented parallel to the general direction of the flow. It is the opposite of confluence.\tDisturbanceA disruption of the atmosphere that usually refers to a low pressure area, cool air and inclement weather.\tDownburstA strong downdraft resulting in an outward burst of damaging winds on or near the ground. Downburst winds can produce damage similar to a strong tornado.\tDowndraftA column of generally cool air that rapidly sinks to the ground, usually accompanied by precipitation as in a shower or thunderstorm.\tDownslope windAir that descends an elevated plain and consequently warms and dries. Occurs when prevailing wind direction is from the same direction as the elevated terrain and often produces fair weather conditions.DraftA draft is a small gusty air current that moves upward or downward abruptly; hence the terms updraft and downdraft.Drifting snowUneven distribution of snowfall caused by strong surface winds. Drifting snow does not reduce visibility. In Canada, it is defined as snow blown to a height of less than two meters.DrizzleSmall, slowly falling water droplets, with diameters between .2 and .5 millimeters. In Australia, it is defined as fairly uniform precipitation (rain) composed exclusively of very small water droplets (less than 0.5 mm in diameter) very close to one another. DroughtAbnormally dry weather in a region over an extended period sufficient to cause a serious hydrological (water cycle) imbalance in the affected area. This can cause such problems as crop damage and water-supply shortage. In Australia, it is defined as the prolonged absence or marked deficiency of precipitation (rain).DryFree from rain. Normally used when preceding weather has also been relatively dry and dry weather is expected to continue for a day or so.Dust stormAn area where high surface winds have picked up loose dust, reducing visibility to less than one-half mile. In Australia, it is described as a storm which carries large amounts of dust into the atmosphere.TopEarlyUntil two hours after sunrise.El Ni\u00f1oA major warming of the equatorial waters in the eastern Pacific Ocean. El Ni\u00f1o events usually occur every three to seven years, and are related to shifts in global weather patterns. (Spanish for the \"Christ Child\u201d because it often begins around Christmas.)EvaporationThe process of a liquid changing into a vapor or gas. EveningSunset to midnight.Extended outlookA basic forecast of general weather conditions three to five days in the future.Extratropical cycloneA storm that forms outside the tropics, sometimes as a tropical storm or hurricane changes. See table below for differences between extratropical and tropical cyclones.TopFahrenheitThe standard scale used to measure temperature in the United States; in which the freezing point of water is 32 degrees and the boiling point is 212 degrees.FairDescribes weather in which there is less than 4/10ths of opaque cloud cover, no precipitation, and there is no extreme visibility, wind or temperature conditions.Fall windA strong, cold, downslope wind.FineNo rain or other precipitation (hail, snow etc.). The use of fine is generally avoided in excessively cloudy, windy, foggy or dusty conditions. In particular note that fine means the absence of rain or other precipitation such as hail or snow - not 'good' or 'pleasant' weather.Flash floodA flood that occurs within a few hours (usually less than six) of heavy or excessive rainfall, dam or levee failure or water released from an ice jam.\t\tFloodA condition that occurs when water overflows the natural or artificial confines of a stream or river; the water also may accumulate by drainage over low-lying areas.\t\tFlood crestThe highest stage or flow occurring in a flood.\t\tFlurryA flurry or snow shower is a snowfall that suddenly stops and starts and changes rapidly in intensity; the accumulation and extent of the snow are limited.FogWater that has condensed close to ground level, producing a cloud of very small droplets that reduces visibility to less than one km (three thousand and three hundred feet). In Canada, fog is defined as a cloud at ground level, and occurs when air is cooled to its dew point and below, or when atmospheric moisture increases through evaporation from water that is warmer than the air. In the United Kingdom, fog is described to occur when visibility less than one kilometer. In Australia, it is defined as a dense mass of small water droplets or particles in the lower atmosphere.FogbowA rainbow that has a white band that appears in fog, and is fringed with red on the outside and blue on the inside. \t\tForecastA forecast provides a description of the most significant weather conditions expected during the current and following days. The exact content depends upon the intended user, such as the Public or Marine forecast audiences. \t\tFreezeOccurs when the surface air temperature is expected to be 32 degrees Fahrenheit or below over a widespread area for a significant period of time. \t In Australia, the term \u201cfreeze\u201d is defined as the change from a liquid to a solid.FreezingThe change in a substance from a liquid to a solid state.\t\tFreezing drizzleDrizzle that falls in liquid form and then freezes upon impact with the ground or an item with a temperature of 32 degrees Fahrenheit or less, possibly producing a thin coating of ice. Even in small amounts, freezing drizzle may cause traveling problems. \t\tFreezing fogA suspension of numerous minute ice crystals in the air, or water droplets at temperatures below zero degrees Celsius, based at the Earth's surface, which reduces horizontal visibility; also called ice fog. \t\tFreezing levelThe altitude in the atmosphere where the temperature drops to 32F. \t\tFreezing rainRain that freezes on objects such as trees, cars and roads, forming a coating or glaze of ice. Temperatures at higher levels are warm enough for rain to form, but surface temperatures are below 32 degrees Fahrenheit, causing the rain to freeze on impact. In Canada, freezing rain is described to occur when the air temperature is below zero Celsius near the ground but above zero Celsius higher up.FrontThe boundary or transition zone between two different air masses. The basic frontal types are cold fronts, warm fronts and occluded fronts.FrostThe formation of thin ice crystals on the ground or other surfaces. Frost develops when the temperature of the exposed surface falls below 32 degrees Fahrenheit and water vapor is deposited as a solid.\tFrost pointWhen the temperature to which air must be cooled to in order to be saturated is below freezing.Fujita scaleSystem developed by Dr Theodore Fujita to classify tornadoes based on wind damage. Scale is from F0 for weakest to F5 for strongest tornadoes. \tFujiwhara effectThe Fujiwhara effect describes the rotation of two storms around each other.Funnel cloudA rotating, cone-shaped column of air extending downward from the base of a thunderstorm but not touching the ground. When it reaches the ground it is called a tornado.\tTopGale warningSustained wind speeds from 34 to 47 knots (39 to 54 mph). \tGlazea layer or coating of ice that is generally smooth and clear, and forms on exposed objects by the freezing of liquid raindrops.\t\tGlobal warmingA theory that increased concentrations of greenhouse gases are causing an elevation in the Earth's surface temperature.\t\tGood visibilityMore than 10 kilometers. \tGreenhouse effectThe warming of the atmosphere by the trapping of longwave radiation (heat) being radiated to space. The gases most responsible for this effect are water vapor and carbon dioxide.\t\tGround fogShallow fog (less than twenty feet deep) produced over the land by the cooling of the lower atmosphere as it comes in contact with the ground. Also known as radiation fog.\tGustA brief sudden increase in wind speed. Generally the duration is less than 20 seconds and the fluctuation greater than 10 miles per hour. In Canada, gust is defined as a sudden, brief increase in wind speed that generally lasts less than 20 seconds. In Australia, gust is defined as any sudden increase of wind of short duration, usually a few seconds.GustnadoGust front tornado. A small tornado, usually weak and short-lived, that occurs along the gust front of a thunderstorm. Often it is visible only as a debris cloud or dust whirl near the ground.TopHailPrecipitation in the form of balls or irregular lumps of ice produced by liquid precipitation, freezing and being coated by layers of ice as it is lifted and cooled in strong updrafts of thunderstorms. \tHazeFine dust or salt particles in the air that reduce visibility. In Canada, haze is defined to consist of fine particles of dust and pollution suspended in the atmosphere, and is distinguished from fog by its bluish or yellowish tinge.Heat balanceThe equilibrium existing between the radiation received and emitted by a planetary system.\t\t\tHeat indexAn index that combines air temperature and humidity to give an apparent temperature (how hot it feels).\t\t\tHeat islandA dome of elevated temperatures over an urban area caused by the heat absorbed by structures and pavement.\t\t\tHeat lightningLightning that can be seen, but is too far away for the thunder to be heard.\tHeat waveA period of abnormally hot weather lasting several days. Heavy snowDepending on the region of the USA, this generally means that four or more inches of snow has accumulated in 12 hours, or six or more inches of snow in 24 hours. \t\t\tHeavy snow warningOlder terminology replaced by winter storm warning for heavy snow. Issued when seven or more inches of snow or sleet is expected in the next 24 hours. A warning is used for winter weather conditions posing a threat to life and property. \tHeavy surfthe result of large waves breaking on or near the shore resulting from swells or produced by a distant storm.HighAn area of high pressure, usually accompanied by anticyclonic and outward wind flow. Also known as an anticyclone. In Canada, a high is described as an area of high atmospheric pressure with a closed, clockwise movement of air. High cloudCirrus, cirrostratus and cirrocumulus.\tHigh risk (of severe thunderstorm)Severe weather is expected to affect more than 10 percent of the area.High wind warningIssued when sustained winds from 40 to 73 mph are expected for at least one hour; or any wind gusts are expected to reach 58 miles per hour or more.\t\tHigh wind watchIssued when conditions are favorable for the development of high winds over all of or part of the forecast area but the occurrence is still uncertain. The criteria of a high wind watch are listed under the high wind warning and should include the area affected, the reason for the watch and the potential impact of the winds. \tHot or very warmIn summer, hot or very warm means more than seven degrees Celsius above normal.Hot spotTypically large areas of pavement, these \"hot spots\" are heated much quicker by the sun than surrounding grasses and forests. As a result, air rises upwards from the relatively hot surface of the pavement, reaches its condensation level, condenses, and forms a cloud above the \"hot spot\". HumidityThe amount of water vapor in the atmosphere. In Canada, it is described as the amount of moisture in the air.HurricaneA severe tropical cyclone with sustained winds over 74 miles per hour (64 knots). Normally applied to such storms in the Atlantic Basin and the Pacific Ocean east of the International Date Line.\tHygrometerAn instrument used to measure humidity.TopIce crystalsIce crystals are tiny sprinkles that sparkle in the sunshine like diamond dust and hang in the air. Ice fogA suspension of numerous minute ice crystals in the air, or water droplets at temperatures below zero degrees Celsius, based at the Earth's surface, which reduces horizontal visibility. Usually occurs at -20 degrees Fahrenheit and below.\t\tIce pelletsPrecipitation of transparent or translucent pellets of ice, which are round or irregular, rarely conical, and which have a diameter of 0.2 inch (five millimeters), or less. There are two main types. Hard grains of ice consisting of frozen raindrops and pellets of snow encased in a thin layer of ice.\t\tIce stormLiquid rain falling and freezing on contact with cold objects creating ice build-ups of 1/4th inch or more that can cause severe damage.\t\tIce storm warningOlder terminology replaced by winter storm warning for severe icing. Issued when 1/2 inch or more of accretion of freezing rain is expected. This may lead to dangerous walking or driving conditions and the pulling down of power lines and trees. A warning is used for winter weather conditions posing a threat to life and property.\t\tIndian summerAn unseasonably warm period near the middle of autumn, usually following a substantial period of cool weather.\t\tInflow bands (or feeder bands)Bands of low clouds, arranged parallel to the low-level winds and moving into or toward a thunderstorm.\t\tInsolationIncoming solar radiation. Solar heating; sunshine.\t\tInstabilityA state of the atmosphere in which convection takes place spontaneously, leading to cloud formation and precipitation.\t\tIntermittent rainIntermittent rain stops and starts repeatedly, although not as abruptly or as frequently as showers. Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ)The region where the northeasterly and southeasterly trade winds converge, forming an often continuous band of clouds or thunderstorms near the equator.InversionAn increase in temperature with height. The reverse of the normal cooling with height in the atmosphere. Temperature inversions trap atmospheric pollutants in the lower troposphere, resulting in higher concentrations of pollutants at ground levels than would usually be experienced.IridescenceBrilliant patches of green or pink sometimes seen near the edges of high- or medium-level clouds.Isentropic liftLifting of air that is traveling along an upward-sloping isentropic surface. Situations involving isentropic lift often are characterized by widespread stratiform clouds and precipitation.TopJet streamStrong winds concentrated within a narrow band in the upper atmosphere. It normally refers to horizontal, high-altitude winds. The jet stream often \"steers\" surface features such as front and low pressure systems.TopKatabaticWind blowing down an incline, such as down a hillside; downslope wind.KatafrontA front (usually a cold front) at which the warm air descents the frontal surface.Killing frostFrost severe enough to end the growing season. This usually occurs at temperatures below 28 degrees Fahrenheit. In Canada, a killing frost is described as a frost severe enough to destroy annual plants and new growth on trees (in the spring) or to end the growing season (in the fall).KnotA measure of speed. It is one nautical mile per hour (1.15 miles per hour). A nautical mile is one minute of one degree of latitude.TopLa Ni\u00f1aA cooling of the equatorial waters in the Pacific Ocean. Land breezeA wind that blows from the land towards a body of water. Also known as an offshore breeze. It occurs when the land is cooler than the water.LateFrom sunset (winter), from two hours before sunset (summer).LeewardSituated away from the wind; downwind - opposite of windward.Left MoverA thunderstorm which moves to the left relative to the steering winds and to other nearby thunderstorms; often the northern part of a splitting storm.LiftingThe forcing of air in a vertical direction by an upslope in terrain or by the movement of a denser air mass.Lifting condensation levelThe level in the atmosphere where a lifted air parcel reaches its saturation point, and as a result, the water vapor within condenses into water droplets.LightningAny form of visible electrical discharges produced by thunderstorms.LikelyIn probability of precipitation statements, the equivalent of a 60 or 70 percent chance.\tLowAn area of low pressure, usually accompanied by cyclonic and inward wind flow. Also known as a cyclone.Low cloudStratus, stratocumulus, cumulus and cumulonimbus.Low-level jetA region of relatively strong winds in the lower part of the atmosphere.\tTopMainly cloudyMore than half cloud cover but with some breaks in the cloud. It can also be described as cloudy with some sunny periods.Mainly sunnyMainly sunny means sunny with some cloudy periods. \tMammatus (or mamma clouds)These clouds appear as hanging, rounded protuberances or pouches on the under-surface of a cloud. With thunderstorms, mammatus are seen on the underside of the anvil. These clouds do not produce tornadoes, funnels, hail, or any other type of severe weather, although they often accompany severe thunderstorms.Maritime air massAn air mass that forms over water. It is usually humid, and may be cold or warm.Maximum temperatureThe highest temperature during a specified time period.Mean temperatureThe average of a series of temperatures taken over a period of time, such as a day or a month.Medium cloudAltostratus, altocumulus and nimbostratus.MeteorologyThe study of the physics, chemistry, and dynamics of the atmosphere and the direct effects of the atmosphere upon the Earth's surface, the oceans, and life in general.MildIn winter, mild refers to four to seven degrees Celsius above normal.Minimum temperatureThe lowest temperature during a specified time period.MistConsists of microscopic water droplets suspended in the air, which produces a thin grayish veil over the landscape. It reduces visibility to a lesser extent than fog. In Australia, it is described as similar to fog, but visibility remains more than a kilometer. Moderate riskSevere thunderstorms are expected to affect between five and 10 percent of the area.Moderate visibilityFive to 10 kilometers\u2019 visibility.MonsoonA persistent seasonal wind, often responsible for seasonal precipitation regime. It is most commonly used to describe meteorological changes in southern and eastern Asia.MorningSunrise to noon or midnight to noon depending on context.Mountain breezeSystem of winds that blow downhill during the night.MuggyColloquially descriptive of warm and especially humid weather.Multivortex tornadoA tornado in which two or more condensation funnels or debris clouds are present at the same time, often rotating about a common center or about each other. Multiple-vortex tornadoes can be especially damaging.MushroomA thunderstorm with a well-defined anvil rollover, and thus having a visual appearance resembling a mushroom.TopNight, overnightSunset to sunrise.No weather data availableNo weather information available for this time slot.NormalThe long-term average value of a meteorological element for a certain area. For example, \"temperatures are normal for this time of year\" Usually averaged over 30 years.TopOffshore breezeA wind that blows from the land towards a body of water. Also known as a land breeze.Offshore forecastA marine weather forecast for the waters between 60 and 250 miles off the coast.Onshore breezeA wind that blows from a body of water towards the land. Also known as a sea breeze.OutflowAir that flows outward from a thunderstorm.Outflow windsWinds that blow down fjords and inlets from the land to the sea.OvercastSky condition when greater than 9/10ths of the sky is covered by clouds. In Canada overcast means grey and dull skies, with extensive cloud cover.OverrunningA condition that exists when a relatively warm air mass moves up and over a colder and denser air mass on the surface. The result is usually low clouds, fog and steady, light precipitation.OzoneA form of oxygen in which the molecule is made of three atoms instead of the usual two. Ozone is usually found in the stratosphere, and responsible for filtering out much of the sun's ultraviolet radiation. It is also a primary component of smog.Ozone holeA thinning of the ozone layer over Antarctica, which occurs each spring.TopPartly cloudySky condition when between 3/10ths and 7/10ths of the sky is covered. Used more frequently at night. In the United Kingdom, it is defined as less than half cloud cover.Partly sunnySimilar to partly cloudy. Used to emphasize daytime sunshine.PermafrostA soil layer below the surface of tundra regions that remains frozen permanently.Polar airA mass of very cold, very dry air that forms in polar regions.Polar frontThe semi-permanent, semi-continuous front that encircles the northern hemisphere separating air masses of tropical and polar origin.Polar Stratospheric Clouds (PSCs)High altitude clouds that form in the stratosphere above Antarctica during the Southern Hemisphere winter. Their presence seems to initiate the ozone loss experienced during the ensuing southern hemisphere spring.Polar vortexA circumpolar wind circulation which isolates the Antarctic continent during the cold Southern Hemisphere winter, heightening ozone depletion.Poor visibilityOne to five kilometers\u2019 visibility.POPProbability of Precipitation. Probability forecasts are subjective estimates of the chances of encountering measurable precipitation at some time during the forecast period.Popcorn convectionClouds, showers and thundershowers that form on a scattered basis with little or no apparent organization, usually during the afternoon in response to diurnal heating.PrecipitationLiquid or solid water that falls from the atmosphere and reaches the ground.PressureThe force exerted by the interaction of the atmosphere and gravity. Also known as atmospheric pressure.Pressure changeThe net difference between pressure readings at the beginning and ending of a specified interval of time.Pressure falling rapidlyA decrease in station pressure at a rate of 0.06 inch of mercury or more per hour which totals 0.02 inches or more.Pressure rising rapidlyAn increase in station pressure at a rate of 0.06 inch of mercury or more per hour which totals 0.02 inches or more.Pressure tendencyThe character and amount of atmospheric pressure change during a specified period of time, usually the three-hour period preceding an observation.Prevailing westerliesWinds in the middle latitudes (approximately 30 degrees to 60 degrees) that generally blow from west to east.Prevailing windThe direction from which the wind blows most frequently in any location.Pulse stormA thunderstorm within which a brief period (pulse) of strong updraft occurs, during and immediately after which the storm produces a short episode of severe weather. These storms generally are not tornado producers, but often produce large hail and/or damaging winds. See overshooting top, cyclic storm.TopQualitative forecastsForecasts that provide only a categorical value for the predicted variable. Examples of this include \u201crain/no rain\u201d and \u201ccloudy/partly cloudy\u201d.Quantitative forecastsForecasts in which the \u201camount\u201d of the forecast variable is specified. Quantitative precipitation forecast (QPF)A forecast of rainfall, snowfall or liquid equivalent of snowfall.Quasi-biennial oscillation (QBO)Periodic variation in the direction, either easterly or westerly, of tropical lower stratospheric winds. The direction changes every 26 months.Quasi-nonhydrostatic (QNH) Pilots, air traffic control (ATC) and low frequency weather beacons use this pressure setting to refer to the barometric altimeter setting that causes the altimeter to read altitude above mean sea level within a certain defined region. Quasi-stationary front A front which is nearly stationary or moves very little since the last synoptic position. Also known as a stationary front.TopRadarAn instrument used to detect precipitation by measuring the strength of the electromagnetic signal reflected back. (RADAR= Radio Detection and Ranging).RadiationEnergy emitted in the form of electromagnetic waves. Radiation has differing characteristics depending upon the wavelength. Radiation from the Sun has a short wavelength (ultra-violet) while energy re-radiated from the Earth's surface and the atmosphere has a long wavelength (infra-red).Radiation fogFog produced over the land by the cooling of the lower atmosphere as it comes in contact with the ground. Also known as ground fog.RainLiquid water droplets that fall from the atmosphere, having diameters greater than drizzle (0.5 mm). In Canada the term \"rain\", used alone, means liquid precipitation of significant duration and extent.Rain gaugeAn instrument used to measure rainfall amounts.Rain showersRain showers stop and start suddenly and vary widely in intensity, and are gone in less than an hour.RainbowOptical phenomena when light is refracted and reflected by moisture in the air into concentric arcs of color. Raindrops act like prisms, breaking the light into the colors of a rainbow, with red on the outer, and blue on the inner edge.Relative humidityThe amount of water vapor in the air, compared to the amount the air could hold if it was totally saturated. It is expressed as a percentage.Return flowSouth winds on the back (west) side of an eastward-moving surface high pressure system. Return flow over the central and eastern United States typically results in a return of moist air from the Gulf of Mexico (or the Atlantic Ocean).RidgeAn elongated area of high pressure in the atmosphere. Opposite of a trough.River flood warningIssued when main stem rivers are expected to reach a level above flood stage.Roll cloudA relatively rare, low-level horizontal, tube-shaped accessory cloud completely detached from the cumulonimbus base. When present, it is located along the gust front and most frequently observed on the leading edge of a line of thunderstorms. The roll cloud will appear to be slowly \"rolling\" about its horizontal axis. Roll clouds are not and do not produce tornadoes.TopSandstormParticles of sand carried aloft by a strong wind. The sand particles are mostly confined to the lowest ten feet, and rarely rise more than fifty feet above the ground.SaturationA condition of the atmosphere in which a certain volume of air holds the maximum water vapor it can hold at a specific temperature.ScatteredA cloud layer that covers between 3/8ths and 1/2 of the sky.Scud cloudsSmall, ragged, low cloud fragments that are unattached to a larger cloud base and often seen with and behind cold fronts and thunderstorm gust fronts. Such clouds generally are associated with cool moist air, such as thunderstorm outflow.Sea breezeA wind that blows from a sea or ocean towards a land mass. Also known as an onshore breeze. It occurs when the land is warmer than the water.Sea-level pressureThe pressure value obtained by the theoretical reduction or increase of barometric pressure to sea-level.Secondary cold frontA front that follows a primary cold front and ushers in even colder air.Severe thunderstormA strong thunderstorm with wind gusts in excess of 58 mph (50 knots) and/or hail with a diameter of 3/4 inch or more.Shallow fogFog in which the visibility at 6 feet above ground level is 5/8ths of a mile or more.Shelf-cloudA low-level horizontal accessory cloud that appears to be wedge-shaped as it approaches. It is usually attached to the thunderstorm base and forms along the gust front.Short-fuse warningA warning issued by the National Weather Service for a local weather hazard of relatively short duration. Short-fuse warnings include tornado warnings, severe thunderstorm warnings, and flash flood warnings. Tornado and severe thunderstorm warnings typically are issued for periods of an hour or less, flash flood warnings typically for three hours or less.ShowerPrecipitation that is intermittent, both in time, space or intensity.Sky conditionThe state of the sky in terms of such parameters as sky cover, layers and associated heights, ceiling, and cloud types.SleetRain drops that freeze into ice pellets before reaching the ground. Sleet usually bounces when hitting a surface and does not stick to objects. Forms when snow enters a warm layer of air above the surface and melts and then enters a deep layer of sub freezing air near the surface and refreezes. In Australia, sleet refers to a mixture of rain and snow or falling snow that is melting into rain.Slight chanceIn probability of precipitation statements, usually equivalent to a 20 percent chance.Slight risk (of severe thunderstorms)Severe thunderstorms are expected to affect between two and five percent of the area. A slight risk generally implies that severe weather events are expected to be isolated.SmogPollution formed by the interaction of pollutants and sunlight (photochemical smog), usually restricting visibility, and occasionally hazardous to health.SmokeA suspension in the air of small particles produced by combustion. A transition to haze may occur when smoke particles have traveled great distances (25 to 100 statute miles or more) and when the larger particles have settled out and the remaining particles have become widely scattered through the atmosphere.\tSnowFrozen precipitation composed of ice particles in complex hexagonal patterns. Snow forms in cold clouds by the direct transfer of water vapor to ice.Snow burstVery intense shower of snow, often of short duration, that greatly restricts visibility and produces periods of rapid snow accumulation.Snow flurriesLight snow showers, usually of an intermittent nature and short duration with no measurable accumulation.Snow grainsLight snow showers, usually of an intermittent nature and short duration with no measurable accumulation. In Canada, Snow grains are described as minute, white and opaque grains of ice. When they hit hard ground, they do not bounce or shatter. They usually fall in very small quantities, and never in the form of a shower.Snow pelletsPrecipitation of white, opaque grains of ice. The grains are round or sometimes conical. Diameters range from about 0.08 to 0.2 inch (2 to 5 mm). In Canada, snow pellets are brittle and easily crushed; when they fall on hard ground, they bounce and often break up. They always occur in showers and are often accompanied by snowflakes or rain drops, when the surface temperature is around zero degrees Celsius.Snow showerSnow falling at varying intensities for brief periods of time. Some accumulation is possible.Snow squallsIntense, but of limited duration, periods of moderate to heavy snowfall, accompanied by strong, gusty surface winds and possible lightning. In Canada, it is described that a snow squall brings strong winds, flurries and poor visibility.SnowfallThe depth of new snow that has accumulated since the previous day or since the previous observation.SnowflakeWhite ice crystals that have combined in a complex branched hexagonal form.Special marine warningIssued for brief or sudden occurrence of sustained wind or frequent gusts of 34 knots or more. This is usually associated with severe thunderstorms or waterspouts.SprayAn ensemble of water droplets torn by the wind from an extensive body of water, generally from the crests of waves, and carried up into the air in such quantities that it reduces the horizontal visibility.SquallA strong wind characterized by a sudden onset in which the wind speed increases at least 16 knots and is sustained at 22 knots or more for at least one minute. In Canada, a squall is defined as a strong, sudden wind which generally lasts a few minutes then quickly decreases in speed. In Australia, it is described as a sudden increase of the mean wind speed which lasts for several minutes at least before the mean wind returns to near its previous value.StabilityAn indication of how easily a parcel of air is lifted. If the air is very stable it is difficult to make the parcel rise. If the air is very unstable the parcel may rise on its own once started.Stable airAir with little or no tendency to rise, usually accompanied by clear dry weather.Steam fogFog that is formed when water vapor is added to air which is much colder than the vapor's source. This is most common when very cold air drifts across relatively warm water.Steering winds (steering currents)A prevailing synoptic scale flow which governs the movement of smaller features embedded within it. StormIn marine usage, winds 48 knots (55 miles per hour) or greater.Storm surgeA rise of the sea level alone the shore that builds up as a storm (usually a hurricane) moves over water. It is a result of the winds of the storm and low atmospheric pressures.Storm warningA marine wind warning for sustained winds greater of 48 knots (55 miles per hour) or more from a non-tropical system.Straight line windsThunderstorm winds most often found with the gust front.Subtropical stormA low pressure system that develops in subtropical waters (north of 20 north degrees latitude) and initially has non-tropical features (see table below for a list of tropical features) but does have some element of a tropical cyclone's cloud structure (located close to the center rather than away from the center of circulation).SunnySunny or a few clouds means that less than half the sky has clouds.SupercellA severe thunderstorm whose updrafts and downdrafts are in near balance allowing the storm to maintain itself for several hours. Supercells often produce large hail and tornadoes.SupersaturationThe condition which occurs in the atmosphere when the relative humidity is greater than 100 percent.TopTemperatureA measure of the warmth or coldness of an object or substance with reference to a standard value.ThunderThe sound caused by a lightning stroke as it heats the air and causes it to rapidly expand.ThunderstormA storm with lightning and thunder produced by a Cumulonimbus cloud, usually producing gusty winds, heavy rain and sometimes hail. In Australia, they are described to be usually short-lived and hit on only a small area.\tTilted storm or tilted updraftA thunderstorm or cloud tower which is not purely vertical but instead exhibits a slanted or tilted character. It is a sign of vertical wind shear, a favorable condition for severe storm development.TodayUntil sunset. TomorrowMidnight to midnight.TonightSunset to midnight.TornadoA violent rotating column of air, in contact with the ground, pendant from a cumulonimbus cloud. A tornado does not require the visible presence of a funnel cloud. It has a typical width of tens to hundreds of meters and a lifespan of minutes to hours.Trade windsPersistent tropical winds that blow from the subtropical high pressure centers towards the equatorial low. They blow northeasterly in the northern hemisphere. \tTropical stormAn organized low pressure system in the tropics with wind speeds between 38 and 74 miles per hour. In Australia, it is a term used in the northern hemisphere for a tropical cyclone.Tropical storm warningA warning issued when sustained winds of 39 to 73 miles per hour (34 to 63 knots) are expected within 24 hours. TroughA warning issued when sustained winds of 39 to 73 mph (34 to 63 knots) are expected within 24 hours. In Canada, it is described as an elongated area of relatively low pressure extending from the centre of a region of low pressure. TroughA warning issued when sustained winds of 39 to 73 mph (34 to 63 knots) are expected within 24 hours. In Canada, it is described as an elongated area of relatively low pressure extending from the centre of a region of low pressure. TurbulenceA warning issued when sustained winds of 39 to 73 miles per hour (34 to 63 knots) are expected within 24 hours.TwisterA colloquial term for a tornado.TyphoonA hurricane that forms in the Western Pacific Ocean. It is a term used in Australia for a tropical cyclone in the northwestern Pacific with maximum winds above 117 kilometers per hour (63 knots).TopUnstable airAir that rises easily and can form clouds and rain.TopVery coolVery cool, in the summer, refers to more than seven degrees Celsius below normal.Very mildIn the winter, very mild means more than seven degrees Celsius above normal.TopWarmIn summer, warm refers to four to seven degrees Celsius above normal.Warm frontA narrow transitions zone separating advancing warmer air from retreating cooler air. The air behind a warm front is warmer and typically more humid than the air it is replacing.\t In Canada, it is defined as the trailing edge of a retreating cold air mass and moves in such a way that the warmer air replaces the colder air.WaveIn meteorology any pattern identifiable on a weather map that has a cyclic pattern or a small cyclonic circulation in the early stages of development that moves along a cold front. In Canada, A wave, in meteorology, is the intersection of warm and cold fronts.WeatherState of the atmosphere with respect to heat or cold, wetness or dryness, calm or storm, clearness or cloudiness. Also, weather is the meteorological day-to-day variations of the atmosphere and their effects on life and human activity. It includes temperature, pressure, humidity, clouds, wind, precipitation and fog.WindWind is the horizontal movement of air relative to the earth's surface and is caused by variations in temperature and pressure (for instance, air rises as it warms and a cool breeze moves in to take the place of the rising air.) Wind is also known as moving air.Wind chillThe additional cooling effect resulting from wind blowing on bare skin. The wind chill is based on the rate of heat loss from exposed skin caused by the combined effects of wind and cold. The (equivalent) wind chill temperature is the temperature the body \"feels\" for a certain combination of wind and air temperature.Winter stormA heavy snow event. A snow accumulation of more than six inches in 12 hours or more than 12 inches in 24 hours.Winter storm warningIssued when seven or more inches of snow or sleet is expected in the next 24 hours, or 1/2 inch or more of accretion of freezing rain is expected. A warning is used for winter weather conditions posing a threat to life and property.TopX-rayAn electromagnetic wave of very short wavelength, able to pass through many materials opaque to light.XenonAn inert gaseous chemical element, present in trace amounts in the air and used in some kinds of electric light.TopYellow windA strong, cold, dry west wind of eastern Asia that blows across the plains during winter and carries a yellow dust from the desert.YougA hot wind during unsettled summer weather in the Mediterranean.TopZonal flow A small amplitude pattern where winds blow mostly west-to-east.Zonal windWind blowing east-to-west or west-to-east.Zulu time The mean solar time for the meridian at Greenwich, England, used as a basis for calculating time in communications, military, aviation, maritime and other activities that cross time zones. Zulu time, which is also known as Coordinated Universal Time (UTC), is used internally among people working in the field of weather and meteorology, as well as among weather enthusiasts, for weather reports and forecasts. Sources: The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) National Weather Service, the Met Office in the United Kingdom, Canada\u2019s Weather Office, and the Australian Government Bureau of Meteorology.Topics:World Weather\u00a0Advertising You might also like When Is the Equinox?The Vernal (Spring) Equinox in the Northern Hemisphere is the Autumnal (Fall) Equinox in the Southern Hemisphere. moreiOS App: Time & Date Calculator Counting the days? Let our Time & Date Calculator App for iOS do the math for you. moreTry the Night Sky Map!Find and track planets in the sky with our new Interactive Night Sky Map. Point your mobile at the sky to follow an object, or play around with the timeline. more Worm Moon in MarchThe Full Moon in March is the Worm Moon. It is also called Lenten Moon, Crow Moon, Crust Moon, Chaste Moon, Sugar Moon, and Sap Moon. more Copyright \u00a9 Time and Date AS 1995\u20132019. All rights reserved. Feedback | About Us | Advertising | Disclaimer | Privacy | Sitemap", "Urban Dictionary: driftingBrowseABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ#newVoteStoreCartTop definitiondriftingunknownHow to aim one&apos;s car at a wall and miss it completely; drifting is the opposite of grip driving, which involves taking a corner without sliding. This can be done without any regard to horsepower, weight, or any other factors. Essentially this means any car can drift, however, some cars are more apt to powerslide than drift. Drifting originated in Japan, thus most cars used to drift are Japanese. Most of the cars used to drift are also usually RWD cars with FR layouts, as they are easier to drift than AWD cars, FWD cars, or RWD cars with MR layouts. However, other drivetrains are used for drifting by different people, as driving styles vary from person to person. Some common cars used to drift are the Nissan Silvia, the Nissan 350Z, the Mazda RX-7, and the Toyota Supra.Drifting is not for the faint of heart, the poor, or those who are nursing, pregnant, or may become pregnant. If you have trouble experiencing any epic, you may not wish to try to drifting, as it will have a sudden spike in epic if done correctly.#drift#powerslide#cars#japan#rwdby stiffshifter September 14, 200933593 Get a drifting mug for your cat Abdul.2driftingunknownTo cause a vehicle to exceed its tire&apos;s limits of adhesion, exhibiting a lateral slip, resulting in an oversteer condition.Takumi was seen on Interstate 81, in his 1986 Toyota Corolla ,drifting along the many curves in the road.by Srinath May 02, 2004328141 Get a drifting mug for your mate Manafort.3DriftingunknownWhen you are high enough to the point where you don&apos;t speak and your actions are subconsciously done to get you through the high.\"Hey, Zack hasn&apos;t said a thing all night\" \"Yeah, he&apos;s probably just drifting\"#moving#high#uncontrolled#dirfting#drift#fading#stonedby HoneyCombperk June 02, 20133812 Get a Drifting mug for your cousin Rihanna.buy the domain for your pet vlogdrifting.spacedrifting.clubdrifting.fundrifting.life 4driftingunknownDrifting, the art of controling an out of control vehicle.Drifting is not a race at all but rather a subjective sport where drivers compete against each other but are judged on the basis of style and execution--think of it as the &apos;figure skating&apos; of motorsports, a controlled ballet of lightweight vehicles sliding around a turn to make the most stylized and complex drift possible. As it is not a race, drivers are not timed but are judged using a point system based on form, and the high scorer of each heat advances to the next round. To create his (or her) own style, each driver customizes their vehicle with aftermarket parts that shape their personal style and performance. Only certain models are chosen for competitive drifting; though almost any car can be caused to drift momentarily due to a loss of control, the necessity of being able to control the drift requires that only rear-wheel drive and some all wheel drive vehicles be used. Typically, drift drivers use inexpensive and lightweight Japanese vehicles such as the Nissan 240SX and its Japanese counterpart, the Silvia, but American cars have been used in competition recently as well.#drifter#drift\u00b7ed#drift\u00b7ing#drifts#driftyby Mr Drift September 03, 200612751 Get a drifting mug for your brother Manafort.5driftingunknownA really entertaining way to ruin your tires.Some dude just went drifting by me in a cloud of smoke and hit a wall, man!#crashing#missing walls#tokyo#drift king#funby XomegaX October 06, 200910649 Get a drifting mug for your mother-in-law Yasemin.6driftingunknownSomething homeless people do from town to town.Did you see that homless guy drifting last night?#drift#240sx#racing#stupid#motorsport#wannabeby BMWguru November 19, 20106631 Get a drifting mug for your papa G\u00fcnter.7driftingunknownMaking the car slip laterally by means of oversteering. Possible with a RWD vehicle. Some people try this with FWD cars as well by driving in Reverse. Its aptly defined as \"Controlling your car when it is in uncontrolable zone\"US competed in the Drifting Grand Prix with a Pontiac GTO and were knocked out before the round of 15.by LedVTECin August 20, 200413977 Get a drifting mug for your guy Callisto.Categories\ud83d\udeac Drugs\ud83d\ude4f Religion\u26bd\ufe0f Sports\ud83c\udf93 College\ud83c\udfa7 Music\ud83c\udf46 Sex\ud83c\udf70 Food\ud83d\ude4b\ud83c\udffd Name\ud83d\udcac Internet\ud83d\udcc8 Work123Next \u203aLast \u00bb\u00a9 1999-2019 Urban Dictionary \u00aeadvertise\u00a0terms of serviceprivacy\u00a0dmca\u00a0removehelpActivityAlphabetical listdriftbeerdrift bitchdrift cardrift charmdrift compatibledrift drivedrifteddrifted ondrifterdrifter (Noun)Drifter&apos;s stitchdriftgirldrift handleDriftillerationdriftindriftingDrifting in someones wakedrifting napdrifting on a memorydrifting prettydrifting sack of shitdrifting turddrift kingdrift landsDriftless Pony Clubdrift lorddrift lubeDrift Lumberdrift machine!DriftMasta\u00a9 1999-2019 Urban Dictionary \u00aeadvertise\u00a0terms of serviceprivacy\u00a0dmca\u00a0removehelp", "Genetic drift - Wikipedia Genetic drift From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search The change in the frequency of an existing gene variant in a population Not to be confused with Genetic draft, Antigenic drift, or Antigenic shift. Part of a series onEvolutionary biologyClockwise from top: Huxley - Man's Place in Nature, Darwin's finches by Gould, Homology in vertebrates Key topics Introduction to evolution Evidence of evolution Common descent Evidence of common descent Processes and outcomes Population genetics Variation Diversity Mutation Natural selection Adaptation Polymorphism Genetic drift Gene flow Speciation Adaptive radiation Co-operation Coevolution Coextinction Divergence Convergence Parallel evolution Extinction Natural history Origin of life History of life Timeline of evolution Human evolution Phylogeny Biodiversity Biogeography Classification Evolutionary taxonomy Cladistics Transitional fossil Extinction event History of evolutionary theory Overview Renaissance Before Darwin Darwin Origin of Species Before synthesis Modern synthesis Molecular evolution Evo-devo Current research History of speciation History of paleontology (timeline) Fields and applications Applications of evolution Biosocial criminology Ecological genetics Evolutionary aesthetics Evolutionary anthropology Evolutionary computation Evolutionary ecology Evolutionary economics Evolutionary epistemology Evolutionary ethics Evolutionary game theory Evolutionary linguistics Evolutionary medicine Evolutionary neuroscience Evolutionary physiology Evolutionary psychology Experimental evolution Phylogenetics Paleontology Selective breeding Speciation experiments Sociobiology Systematics Universal Darwinism Social implications Evolution as fact and theory Social effects Creation\u2013evolution controversy Objections to evolution Level of support Evolutionary biology portal Category Book Related topicsvte Genetic drift (also known as allelic drift or the Sewall Wright effect)[1] is the change in the frequency of an existing gene variant (allele) in a population due to random sampling of organisms.[2] The alleles in the offspring are a sample of those in the parents, and chance has a role in determining whether a given individual survives and reproduces. A population's allele frequency is the fraction of the copies of one gene that share a particular form.[3] Genetic drift may cause gene variants to disappear completely and thereby reduce genetic variation.[4] It can also cause initially rare alleles to become much more frequent and even fixed. When there are few copies of an allele, the effect of genetic drift is larger, and when there are many copies the effect is smaller. In the early 20th century, vigorous debates occurred over the relative importance of natural selection versus neutral processes, including genetic drift. Ronald Fisher, who explained natural selection using Mendelian genetics,[5] held the view that genetic drift plays at the most a minor role in evolution, and this remained the dominant view for several decades. In 1968, population geneticist Motoo Kimura rekindled the debate with his neutral theory of molecular evolution, which claims that most instances where a genetic change spreads across a population (although not necessarily changes in phenotypes) are caused by genetic drift acting on neutral mutations.[6][7] Contents 1 Analogy with marbles in a jar 2 Probability and allele frequency 3 Mathematical models 3.1 Wright\u2013Fisher model 3.2 Moran model 3.3 Other models of drift 3.4 Random effects other than sampling error 4 Drift and fixation 4.1 Rate of allele frequency change due to drift 4.2 Time to fixation or loss 4.3 Time to loss with both drift and mutation 5 Versus natural selection 6 Population bottleneck 6.1 Founder effect 7 History 8 See also 9 Notes and references 10 Bibliography 11 External links Analogy with marbles in a jar[edit] The process of genetic drift can be illustrated using 20 marbles in a jar to represent 20 organisms in a population.[8] Consider this jar of marbles as the starting population. Half of the marbles in the jar are red and half are blue, with each colour corresponding to a different allele of one gene in the population. In each new generation the organisms reproduce at random. To represent this reproduction, randomly select a marble from the original jar and deposit a new marble with the same colour into a new jar. This is the \"offspring\" of the original marble, meaning that the original marble remains in its jar. Repeat this process until there are 20 new marbles in the second jar. The second jar will now contain 20 \"offspring\", or marbles of various colours. Unless the second jar contains exactly 10 red marbles and 10 blue marbles, a random shift has occurred in the allele frequencies. If this process is repeated a number of times, the numbers of red and blue marbles picked each generation will fluctuate. Sometimes a jar will have more red marbles than its \"parent\" jar and sometimes more blue. This fluctuation is analogous to genetic drift\u00a0\u2013 a change in the population's allele frequency resulting from a random variation in the distribution of alleles from one generation to the next. It is even possible that in any one generation no marbles of a particular colour are chosen, meaning they have no offspring. In this example, if no red marbles are selected, the jar representing the new generation contains only blue offspring. If this happens, the red allele has been lost permanently in the population, while the remaining blue allele has become fixed: all future generations are entirely blue. In small populations, fixation can occur in just a few generations. In this simulation each black dot on a marble signifies that it has been chosen for copying (reproduction) one time. There is fixation in the blue \"allele\" within five generations. Probability and allele frequency[edit] The mechanisms of genetic drift can be illustrated with a simplified example. Consider a very large colony of bacteria isolated in a drop of solution. The bacteria are genetically identical except for a single gene with two alleles labeled A and B. A and B are neutral alleles meaning that they do not affect the bacteria's ability to survive and reproduce; all bacteria in this colony are equally likely to survive and reproduce. Suppose that half the bacteria have allele A and the other half have allele B. Thus A and B each have allele frequency 1/2. The drop of solution then shrinks until it has only enough food to sustain four bacteria. All other bacteria die without reproducing. Among the four who survive, there are sixteen possible combinations for the A and B alleles: (A-A-A-A), (B-A-A-A), (A-B-A-A), (B-B-A-A), (A-A-B-A), (B-A-B-A), (A-B-B-A), (B-B-B-A), (A-A-A-B), (B-A-A-B), (A-B-A-B), (B-B-A-B), (A-A-B-B), (B-A-B-B), (A-B-B-B), (B-B-B-B). Since all bacteria in the original solution are equally likely to survive when the solution shrinks, the four survivors are a random sample from the original colony. The probability that each of the four survivors has a given allele is 1/2, and so the probability that any particular allele combination occurs when the solution shrinks is 1 2 \u22c5 1 2 \u22c5 1 2 \u22c5 1 2 = 1 16 . {\\displaystyle {\\frac {1}{2}}\\cdot {\\frac {1}{2}}\\cdot {\\frac {1}{2}}\\cdot {\\frac {1}{2}}={\\frac {1}{16}}.} (The original population size is so large that the sampling effectively happens without replacement). In other words, each of the sixteen possible allele combinations is equally likely to occur, with probability 1/16. Counting the combinations with the same number of A and B, we get the following table. A B Combinations Probability 4 0 1 1/16 3 1 4 4/16 2 2 6 6/16 1 3 4 4/16 0 4 1 1/16 As shown in the table, the total number of combinations that have the same number of A alleles as of B alleles is six, and the probability of this combination is 6/16. The total number of other combinations is ten, so the probability of unequal number of A and B alleles is 10/16. Thus, although the original colony began with an equal number of A and B alleles, it is very possible that the number of alleles in the remaining population of four members will not be equal. Equal numbers is actually less likely than unequal numbers. In the latter case, genetic drift has occurred because the population's allele frequencies have changed due to random sampling. In this example the population contracted to just four random survivors, a phenomenon known as population bottleneck. The probabilities for the number of copies of allele A (or B) that survive (given in the last column of the above table) can be calculated directly from the binomial distribution where the \"success\" probability (probability of a given allele being present) is 1/2 (i.e., the probability that there are k copies of A (or B) alleles in the combination) is given by ( n k ) ( 1 2 ) k ( 1 \u2212 1 2 ) n \u2212 k = ( n k ) ( 1 2 ) n {\\displaystyle {n \\choose k}\\left({\\frac {1}{2}}\\right)^{k}\\left(1-{\\frac {1}{2}}\\right)^{n-k}={n \\choose k}\\left({\\frac {1}{2}}\\right)^{n}\\!} where n=4 is the number of surviving bacteria. Mathematical models[edit] Mathematical models of genetic drift can be designed using either branching processes or a diffusion equation describing changes in allele frequency in an idealised population.[9] Wright\u2013Fisher model[edit] Consider a gene with two alleles, A or B. In diploid populations consisting of N individuals there are 2N copies of each gene. An individual can have two copies of the same allele or two different alleles. We can call the frequency of one allele p and the frequency of the other q. The Wright\u2013Fisher model (named after Sewall Wright and Ronald Fisher) assumes that generations do not overlap (for example, annual plants have exactly one generation per year) and that each copy of the gene found in the new generation is drawn independently at random from all copies of the gene in the old generation. The formula to calculate the probability of obtaining k copies of an allele that had frequency p in the last generation is then[10][11] ( 2 N ) ! k ! ( 2 N \u2212 k ) ! p k q 2 N \u2212 k {\\displaystyle {\\frac {(2N)!}{k!(2N-k)!}}p^{k}q^{2N-k}} where the symbol \"!\" signifies the factorial function. This expression can also be formulated using the binomial coefficient, ( 2 N k ) p k q 2 N \u2212 k {\\displaystyle {2N \\choose k}p^{k}q^{2N-k}} Moran model[edit] The Moran model assumes overlapping generations. At each time step, one individual is chosen to reproduce and one individual is chosen to die. So in each timestep, the number of copies of a given allele can go up by one, go down by one, or can stay the same. This means that the transition matrix is tridiagonal, which means that mathematical solutions are easier for the Moran model than for the Wright\u2013Fisher model. On the other hand, computer simulations are usually easier to perform using the Wright\u2013Fisher model, because fewer time steps need to be calculated. In the Moran model, it takes N timesteps to get through one generation, where N is the effective population size. In the Wright\u2013Fisher model, it takes just one.[12] In practice, the Moran and Wright\u2013Fisher models give qualitatively similar results, but genetic drift runs twice as fast in the Moran model. Other models of drift[edit] If the variance in the number of offspring is much greater than that given by the binomial distribution assumed by the Wright\u2013Fisher model, then given the same overall speed of genetic drift (the variance effective population size), genetic drift is a less powerful force compared to selection.[13] Even for the same variance, if higher moments of the offspring number distribution exceed those of the binomial distribution then again the force of genetic drift is substantially weakened.[14] Random effects other than sampling error[edit] Random changes in allele frequencies can also be caused by effects other than sampling error, for example random changes in selection pressure.[15] One important alternative source of stochasticity, perhaps more important than genetic drift, is genetic draft.[16] Genetic draft is the effect on a locus by selection on linked loci. The mathematical properties of genetic draft are different from those of genetic drift.[17] The direction of the random change in allele frequency is autocorrelated across generations.[2] Drift and fixation[edit] The Hardy\u2013Weinberg principle states that within sufficiently large populations, the allele frequencies remain constant from one generation to the next unless the equilibrium is disturbed by migration, genetic mutations, or selection.[18] However, in finite populations, no new alleles are gained from the random sampling of alleles passed to the next generation, but the sampling can cause an existing allele to disappear. Because random sampling can remove, but not replace, an allele, and because random declines or increases in allele frequency influence expected allele distributions for the next generation, genetic drift drives a population towards genetic uniformity over time. When an allele reaches a frequency of 1 (100%) it is said to be \"fixed\" in the population and when an allele reaches a frequency of 0 (0%) it is lost. Smaller populations achieve fixation faster, whereas in the limit of an infinite population, fixation is not achieved. Once an allele becomes fixed, genetic drift comes to a halt, and the allele frequency cannot change unless a new allele is introduced in the population via mutation or gene flow. Thus even while genetic drift is a random, directionless process, it acts to eliminate genetic variation over time.[19] Rate of allele frequency change due to drift[edit] Ten simulations of random genetic drift of a single given allele with an initial frequency distribution 0.5 measured over the course of 50 generations, repeated in three reproductively synchronous populations of different sizes. In these simulations, alleles drift to loss or fixation (frequency of 0.0 or 1.0) only in the smallest population. Assuming genetic drift is the only evolutionary force acting on an allele, after t generations in many replicated populations, starting with allele frequencies of p and q, the variance in allele frequency across those populations is V t \u2248 p q ( 1 \u2212 exp \u2061 ( \u2212 t 2 N e ) ) {\\displaystyle V_{t}\\approx pq\\left(1-\\exp \\left(-{\\frac {t}{2N_{e}}}\\right)\\right)} [20] Time to fixation or loss[edit] Assuming genetic drift is the only evolutionary force acting on an allele, at any given time the probability that an allele will eventually become fixed in the population is simply its frequency in the population at that time.[21] For example, if the frequency p for allele A is 75% and the frequency q for allele B is 25%, then given unlimited time the probability A will ultimately become fixed in the population is 75% and the probability that B will become fixed is 25%. The expected number of generations for fixation to occur is proportional to the population size, such that fixation is predicted to occur much more rapidly in smaller populations.[22] Normally the effective population size, which is smaller than the total population, is used to determine these probabilities. The effective population (Ne) takes into account factors such as the level of inbreeding, the stage of the lifecycle in which the population is the smallest, and the fact that some neutral genes are genetically linked to others that are under selection.[13] The effective population size may not be the same for every gene in the same population.[23] One forward-looking formula used for approximating the expected time before a neutral allele becomes fixed through genetic drift, according to the Wright\u2013Fisher model, is T \u00af fixed = \u2212 4 N e ( 1 \u2212 p ) ln \u2061 ( 1 \u2212 p ) p {\\displaystyle {\\bar {T}}_{\\text{fixed}}={\\frac {-4N_{e}(1-p)\\ln(1-p)}{p}}} where T is the number of generations, Ne is the effective population size, and p is the initial frequency for the given allele. The result is the number of generations expected to pass before fixation occurs for a given allele in a population with given size (Ne) and allele frequency (p).[24] The expected time for the neutral allele to be lost through genetic drift can be calculated as[10] T \u00af lost = \u2212 4 N e p 1 \u2212 p ln \u2061 p . {\\displaystyle {\\bar {T}}_{\\text{lost}}={\\frac {-4N_{e}p}{1-p}}\\ln p.} When a mutation appears only once in a population large enough for the initial frequency to be negligible, the formulas can be simplified to[25] T \u00af fixed = 4 N e {\\displaystyle {\\bar {T}}_{\\text{fixed}}=4N_{e}} for average number of generations expected before fixation of a neutral mutation, and T \u00af lost = 2 ( N e N ) ln \u2061 ( 2 N ) {\\displaystyle {\\bar {T}}_{\\text{lost}}=2\\left({\\frac {N_{e}}{N}}\\right)\\ln(2N)} for the average number of generations expected before the loss of a neutral mutation.[26] Time to loss with both drift and mutation[edit] The formulae above apply to an allele that is already present in a population, and which is subject to neither mutation nor natural selection. If an allele is lost by mutation much more often than it is gained by mutation, then mutation, as well as drift, may influence the time to loss. If the allele prone to mutational loss begins as fixed in the population, and is lost by mutation at rate m per replication, then the expected time in generations until its loss in a haploid population is given by T \u00af lost \u2248 { 1 m , if m N e \u226a 1 ln \u2061 ( m N e ) + \u03b3 m if m N e \u226b 1 {\\displaystyle {\\bar {T}}_{\\text{lost}}\\approx {\\begin{cases}{\\dfrac {1}{m}},{\\text{ if }}mN_{e}\\ll 1\\\\[8pt]{\\dfrac {\\ln {(mN_{e})}+\\gamma }{m}}{\\text{ if }}mN_{e}\\gg 1\\end{cases}}} where \u03b3 {\\displaystyle \\gamma } is Euler's constant.[27] The first approximation represents the waiting time until the first mutant destined for loss, with loss then occurring relatively rapidly by genetic drift, taking time Ne\u00a0\u226a\u00a01/m. The second approximation represents the time needed for deterministic loss by mutation accumulation. In both cases, the time to fixation is dominated by mutation via the term 1/m, and is less affected by the effective population size. Versus natural selection[edit] In natural populations, genetic drift and natural selection do not act in isolation; both forces are always at play, together with mutation and migration. Neutral evolution is the product of both mutation and drift, not of drift alone. Similarly, even when selection overwhelms genetic drift, it can only act on variation that mutation provides. While natural selection has a direction, guiding evolution towards heritable adaptations to the current environment, genetic drift has no direction and is guided only by the mathematics of chance.[28] As a result, drift acts upon the genotypic frequencies within a population without regard to their phenotypic effects. In contrast, selection favors the spread of alleles whose phenotypic effects increase survival and/or reproduction of their carriers, lowers the frequencies of alleles that cause unfavorable traits, and ignores those that are neutral.[29] The law of large numbers predicts that when the absolute number of copies of the allele is small (e.g., in small populations), the magnitude of drift on allele frequencies per generation is larger. The magnitude of drift is large enough to overwhelm selection at any allele frequency when the selection coefficient is less than 1 divided by the effective population size. Non-adaptive evolution resulting from the product of mutation and genetic drift is therefore considered to be a consequential mechanism of evolutionary change primarily within small, isolated populations.[30] The mathematics of genetic drift depend on the effective population size, but it is not clear how this is related to the actual number of individuals in a population.[16] Genetic linkage to other genes that are under selection can reduce the effective population size experienced by a neutral allele. With a higher recombination rate, linkage decreases and with it this local effect on effective population size.[31][32] This effect is visible in molecular data as a correlation between local recombination rate and genetic diversity,[33] and negative correlation between gene density and diversity at noncoding DNA regions.[34] Stochasticity associated with linkage to other genes that are under selection is not the same as sampling error, and is sometimes known as genetic draft in order to distinguish it from genetic drift.[16] When the allele frequency is very small, drift can also overpower selection even in large populations. For example, while disadvantageous mutations are usually eliminated quickly in large populations, new advantageous mutations are almost as vulnerable to loss through genetic drift as are neutral mutations. Not until the allele frequency for the advantageous mutation reaches a certain threshold will genetic drift have no effect.[29] Population bottleneck[edit] Main article: Population bottleneck Changes in a population's allele frequency following a population bottleneck: the rapid and radical decline in population size has reduced the population's genetic variation. A population bottleneck is when a population contracts to a significantly smaller size over a short period of time due to some random environmental event. In a true population bottleneck, the odds for survival of any member of the population are purely random, and are not improved by any particular inherent genetic advantage. The bottleneck can result in radical changes in allele frequencies, completely independent of selection.[35] The impact of a population bottleneck can be sustained, even when the bottleneck is caused by a one-time event such as a natural catastrophe. An interesting example of a bottleneck causing unusual genetic distribution is the relatively high proportion of individuals with total rod cell color blindness (achromatopsia) on Pingelap atoll in Micronesia. After a bottleneck, inbreeding increases. This increases the damage done by recessive deleterious mutations, in a process known as inbreeding depression. The worst of these mutations are selected against, leading to the loss of other alleles that are genetically linked to them, in a process of background selection.[2] For recessive harmful mutations, this selection can be enhanced as a consequence of the bottleneck, due to genetic purging. This leads to a further loss of genetic diversity. In addition, a sustained reduction in population size increases the likelihood of further allele fluctuations from drift in generations to come. A population's genetic variation can be greatly reduced by a bottleneck, and even beneficial adaptations may be permanently eliminated.[36] The loss of variation leaves the surviving population vulnerable to any new selection pressures such as disease, climate change or shift in the available food source, because adapting in response to environmental changes requires sufficient genetic variation in the population for natural selection to take place.[37][38] There have been many known cases of population bottleneck in the recent past. Prior to the arrival of Europeans, North American prairies were habitat for millions of greater prairie chickens. In Illinois alone, their numbers plummeted from about 100 million birds in 1900 to about 50 birds in the 1990s. The declines in population resulted from hunting and habitat destruction, but a consequence has been a loss of most of the species' genetic diversity. DNA analysis comparing birds from the mid century to birds in the 1990s documents a steep decline in the genetic variation in just the latter few decades. Currently the greater prairie chicken is experiencing low reproductive success.[39] However, the genetic loss caused by bottleneck and genetic drift can increase fitness, as in Ehrlichia.[40] Over-hunting also caused a severe population bottleneck in the northern elephant seal in the 19th century. Their resulting decline in genetic variation can be deduced by comparing it to that of the southern elephant seal, which were not so aggressively hunted.[41] Founder effect[edit] Main article: Founder effect When very few members of a population migrate to form a separate new population, the founder effect occurs. For a period after the foundation, the small population experiences intensive drift. In the figure this results in fixation of the red allele. The founder effect is a special case of a population bottleneck, occurring when a small group in a population splinters off from the original population and forms a new one. The random sample of alleles in the just formed new colony is expected to grossly misrepresent the original population in at least some respects.[42] It is even possible that the number of alleles for some genes in the original population is larger than the number of gene copies in the founders, making complete representation impossible. When a newly formed colony is small, its founders can strongly affect the population's genetic make-up far into the future. A well-documented example is found in the Amish migration to Pennsylvania in 1744. Two members of the new colony shared the recessive allele for Ellis\u2013van Creveld syndrome. Members of the colony and their descendants tend to be religious isolates and remain relatively insular. As a result of many generations of inbreeding, Ellis-van Creveld syndrome is now much more prevalent among the Amish than in the general population.[29][43] The difference in gene frequencies between the original population and colony may also trigger the two groups to diverge significantly over the course of many generations. As the difference, or genetic distance, increases, the two separated populations may become distinct, both genetically and phenetically, although not only genetic drift but also natural selection, gene flow, and mutation contribute to this divergence. This potential for relatively rapid changes in the colony's gene frequency led most scientists to consider the founder effect (and by extension, genetic drift) a significant driving force in the evolution of new species. Sewall Wright was the first to attach this significance to random drift and small, newly isolated populations with his shifting balance theory of speciation.[44] Following after Wright, Ernst Mayr created many persuasive models to show that the decline in genetic variation and small population size following the founder effect were critically important for new species to develop.[45] However, there is much less support for this view today since the hypothesis has been tested repeatedly through experimental research and the results have been equivocal at best.[46] History[edit] Further information: Modern synthesis (20th century) The concept of genetic drift was introduced by a founder of population genetics, Sewall Wright. His first use of the term \"drift\" was in 1929,[47] though at the time he was using it in the sense of a directed process of change, or natural selection. Random drift by means of sampling error came to be known as the \"Sewall\u2013Wright effect,\" though he was never entirely comfortable to see his name given to it. Wright referred to all changes in allele frequency as either \"steady drift\" (e.g., selection) or \"random drift\" (e.g., sampling error).[48] \"Drift\" came to be adopted as a technical term in the stochastic sense exclusively.[49] Today it is usually defined still more narrowly, in terms of sampling error,[50] although this narrow definition is not universal.[51][52] Wright wrote that the \"restriction of \"random drift\" or even \"drift\" to only one component, the effects of accidents of sampling, tends to lead to confusion.\"[48] Sewall Wright considered the process of random genetic drift by means of sampling error equivalent to that by means of inbreeding, but later work has shown them to be distinct.[53] In the early days of the modern evolutionary synthesis, scientists were beginning to blend the new science of population genetics with Charles Darwin's theory of natural selection. Within this framework, Wright focused on the effects of inbreeding on small relatively isolated populations. He introduced the concept of an adaptive landscape in which phenomena such as cross breeding and genetic drift in small populations could push them away from adaptive peaks, which in turn allow natural selection to push them towards new adaptive peaks.[54] Wright thought smaller populations were more suited for natural selection because \"inbreeding was sufficiently intense to create new interaction systems through random drift but not intense enough to cause random nonadaptive fixation of genes.\"[55] Wright's views on the role of genetic drift in the evolutionary scheme were controversial almost from the very beginning. One of the most vociferous and influential critics was colleague Ronald Fisher. Fisher conceded genetic drift played some role in evolution, but an insignificant one. Fisher has been accused of misunderstanding Wright's views because in his criticisms Fisher seemed to argue Wright had rejected selection almost entirely. To Fisher, viewing the process of evolution as a long, steady, adaptive progression was the only way to explain the ever-increasing complexity from simpler forms. But the debates have continued between the \"gradualists\" and those who lean more toward the Wright model of evolution where selection and drift together play an important role.[56] In 1968, Motoo Kimura rekindled the debate with his neutral theory of molecular evolution, which claims that most of the genetic changes are caused by genetic drift acting on neutral mutations.[6][7] The role of genetic drift by means of sampling error in evolution has been criticized by John H. Gillespie[57] and William B. Provine, who argue that selection on linked sites is a more important stochastic force. See also[edit] Peripatric speciation Antigenic drift Coalescent theory Gene pool Meiotic drive Notes and references[edit] ^ Gould SJ (2002). \"Chapter 7, section \"Synthesis as Hardening\"\". The Structure of Evolutionary Theory. ^ a b c Masel J (October 2011). \"Genetic drift\". Current Biology. Cell Press. 21 (20): R837\u20138. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2011.08.007. PMID\u00a022032182. ^ Futuyma 1998, Glossary ^ Star B, Spencer HG (May 2013). \"Effects of genetic drift and gene flow on the selective maintenance of genetic variation\". Genetics. 194 (1): 235\u201344. doi:10.1534/genetics.113.149781. PMC\u00a03632471. PMID\u00a023457235. ^ Miller 2000, p.\u00a054 ^ a b Kimura M (February 1968). \"Evolutionary rate at the molecular level\". Nature. Nature Publishing Group. 217 (5129): 624\u20136. Bibcode:1968Natur.217..624K. doi:10.1038/217624a0. PMID\u00a05637732. ^ a b Futuyma 1998, p.\u00a0320 ^ \"Sampling Error and Evolution\". Understanding Evolution. University of California, Berkeley. Archived from the original on 8 December 2015. Retrieved 1 December 2015. ^ Wahl LM (August 2011). \"Fixation when N and s vary: classic approaches give elegant new results\". Genetics. Genetics Society of America. 188 (4): 783\u20135. doi:10.1534/genetics.111.131748. PMC\u00a03176088. PMID\u00a021828279. ^ a b Hartl & Clark 2007, p.\u00a0112 ^ Tian 2008, p.\u00a011 ^ Moran PA (1958). \"Random processes in genetics\". Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society. 54 (1): 60\u201371. Bibcode:1958PCPS...54...60M. doi:10.1017/S0305004100033193. ^ a b Charlesworth B (March 2009). \"Fundamental concepts in genetics: effective population size and patterns of molecular evolution and variation\". Nature Reviews. Genetics. Nature Publishing Group. 10 (3): 195\u2013205. doi:10.1038/nrg2526. PMID\u00a019204717. ^ Der R, Epstein CL, Plotkin JB (September 2011). \"Generalized population models and the nature of genetic drift\". Theoretical Population Biology. Elsevier. 80 (2): 80\u201399. doi:10.1016/j.tpb.2011.06.004. PMID\u00a021718713. ^ Li & Graur 1991, p.\u00a028 ^ a b c Gillespie JH (November 2001). \"Is the population size of a species relevant to its evolution?\". Evolution; International Journal of Organic Evolution. John Wiley & Sons for the Society for the Study of Evolution. 55 (11): 2161\u20139. doi:10.1111/j.0014-3820.2001.tb00732.x. PMID\u00a011794777. ^ Neher RA, Shraiman BI (August 2011). \"Genetic draft and quasi-neutrality in large facultatively sexual populations\". Genetics. Genetics Society of America. 188 (4): 975\u201396. arXiv:1108.1635. doi:10.1534/genetics.111.128876. PMC\u00a03176096. PMID\u00a021625002. ^ Ewens 2004 ^ Li & Graur 1991, p.\u00a029 ^ Barton et al. 2007, p.\u00a0417 ^ Futuyma 1998, p.\u00a0300 ^ Otto SP, Whitlock MC (June 1997). \"The probability of fixation in populations of changing size\" (PDF). Genetics. Genetics Society of America. 146 (2): 723\u201333. PMC\u00a01208011. PMID\u00a09178020. Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 March 2015. ^ Cutter AD, Choi JY (August 2010). \"Natural selection shapes nucleotide polymorphism across the genome of the nematode Caenorhabditis briggsae\". Genome Research. Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press. 20 (8): 1103\u201311. doi:10.1101/gr.104331.109. PMC\u00a02909573. PMID\u00a020508143. ^ Hedrick 2005, p.\u00a0315 ^ Li & Graur 1991, p.\u00a033 ^ Kimura & Ohta 1971 ^ Masel J, King OD, Maughan H (January 2007). \"The loss of adaptive plasticity during long periods of environmental stasis\". The American Naturalist. University of Chicago Press on behalf of the American Society of Naturalists. 169 (1): 38\u201346. doi:10.1086/510212. PMC\u00a01766558. PMID\u00a017206583. ^ \"Natural Selection: How Evolution Works\". Actionbioscience. Washington, D.C.: American Institute of Biological Sciences. Archived from the original on 6 January 2010. Retrieved 24 November 2009. An interview with Douglas J. Futuyma. See answer to question: Is natural selection the only mechanism of evolution? ^ a b c Cavalli-Sforza, Menozzi & Piazza 1996 ^ Zimmer 2001 ^ Golding 1994, p.\u00a046 ^ Charlesworth B, Morgan MT, Charlesworth D (August 1993). \"The effect of deleterious mutations on neutral molecular variation\" (PDF). Genetics. Genetics Society of America. 134 (4): 1289\u2013303. PMC\u00a01205596. PMID\u00a08375663. ^ Presgraves DC (September 2005). \"Recombination enhances protein adaptation in Drosophila melanogaster\". Current Biology. Cell Press. 15 (18): 1651\u20136. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2005.07.065. PMID\u00a016169487. ^ Nordborg M, Hu TT, Ishino Y, Jhaveri J, Toomajian C, Zheng H, Bakker E, Calabrese P, Gladstone J, Goyal R, Jakobsson M, Kim S, Morozov Y, Padhukasahasram B, Plagnol V, Rosenberg NA, Shah C, Wall JD, Wang J, Zhao K, Kalbfleisch T, Schulz V, Kreitman M, Bergelson J (July 2005). \"The pattern of polymorphism in Arabidopsis thaliana\". PLoS Biology. Public Library of Science. 3 (7): e196. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0030196. PMC\u00a01135296. PMID\u00a015907155. ^ Robinson R, ed. (2003). \"Population Bottleneck\". Genetics. 3. New York: Macmillan Reference USA. ISBN\u00a00-02-865609-1. LCCN\u00a02002003560. OCLC\u00a0614996575. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016. Retrieved 14 December 2015. ^ Futuyma 1998, pp.\u00a0303\u2013304 ^ O'Corry-Crowe G (March 2008). \"Climate change and the molecular ecology of Arctic marine mammals\". Ecological Applications. Ecological Society of America. 18 (2 Suppl): S56\u201376. doi:10.1890/06-0795.1. PMID\u00a018494363. ^ Cornuet JM, Luikart G (December 1996). \"Description and power analysis of two tests for detecting recent population bottlenecks from allele frequency data\". Genetics. Genetics Society of America. 144 (4): 2001\u201314. PMC\u00a01207747. PMID\u00a08978083. ^ Sadava et al. 2008, chpts. 1, 21\u201333, 52\u201357 ^ Dale C, Moran NA (August 2006). \"Molecular interactions between bacterial symbionts and their hosts\". Cell. 126 (3): 453\u201365. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2006.07.014. PMID\u00a016901780. ^ \"Bottlenecks and founder effects\". Understanding Evolution. University of California, Berkeley. Archived from the original on 4 December 2015. Retrieved 14 December 2015. ^ Campbell 1996, p.\u00a0423 ^ \"Genetic Drift and the Founder Effect\". Evolution Library (Web resource). Evolution. Boston, MA: WGBH Educational Foundation; Clear Blue Sky Productions, Inc. 2001. OCLC\u00a048165595. Archived from the original on 14 March 2009. Retrieved 7 April 2009. ^ Wolf, Brodie & Wade 2000 ^ Hey, Fitch & Ayala 2005 ^ Howard & Berlocher 1998 ^ Wright S (November\u2013December 1929). \"The evolution of dominance\". The American Naturalist. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press on behalf of the American Society of Naturalists. 63 (689): 556\u2013561. doi:10.1086/280290. ISSN\u00a00003-0147. JSTOR\u00a02456825. ^ a b Wright S (1955). \"Classification of the factors of evolution\". Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press. 20: 16\u201324. doi:10.1101/SQB.1955.020.01.004. ISSN\u00a00091-7451. Symposium: \"Population Genetics: The Nature and Causes of Genetic Variability in Populations\". ^ Stevenson 1991 ^ Freeman & Herron 2007 ^ Masel J (August 2012). \"Rethinking Hardy-Weinberg and genetic drift in undergraduate biology\". BioEssays. John Wiley & Sons. 34 (8): 701\u201310. doi:10.1002/bies.201100178. PMID\u00a022576789. ^ Lynch 2007 ^ Crow JF (March 2010). \"Wright and Fisher on inbreeding and random drift\". Genetics. Genetics Society of America. 184 (3): 609\u201311. doi:10.1534/genetics.109.110023. PMC\u00a02845331. PMID\u00a020332416. ^ Larson 2004, pp.\u00a0221\u2013243 ^ Stevenson 1991: Quote attributed to William B. Provine in The Origins of Theoretical Population Genetics (1971), p. 162; Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ^ Avers 1989 ^ Gillespie JH (June 2000). \"Genetic drift in an infinite population. The pseudohitchhiking model\". Genetics. Genetics Society of America. 155 (2): 909\u201319. PMC\u00a01461093. PMID\u00a010835409. Bibliography[edit] Avers CJ (1989). Process and Pattern in Evolution. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN\u00a00-19-505275-7. LCCN\u00a088005368. OCLC\u00a017677554. Barton NH, Briggs DE, Eisen JA, Goldstein DB, Patel NH (2007). Evolution. Cold Spring Harbor, NY: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press. ISBN\u00a0978-0-87969-684-9. LCCN\u00a02007010767. OCLC\u00a086090399. Campbell NA (1996). Biology. Benjamin/Cummings Series in the Life Sciences (4th ed.). Menlo Park, CA: Benjamin/Cummings Pub. Co. ISBN\u00a00-8053-1940-9. LCCN\u00a095045572. OCLC\u00a033333455. Cavalli-Sforza LL, Menozzi P, Piazza A (1996). The History and Geography of Human Genes (Abridged paperback ed.). Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. ISBN\u00a00-691-02905-9. OCLC\u00a035527063. Ewens WJ (2004). Mathematical Population Genetics I. Theoretical Introduction. Interdisciplinary Applied Mathematics. 27 (2nd ed.). New York: Springer-Verlag. ISBN\u00a00-387-20191-2. LCCN\u00a02003065728. OCLC\u00a053231891. Freeman S, Herron JC (2007). Evolutionary Analysis (4th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall. ISBN\u00a0978-0-13-227584-2. LCCN\u00a02006034384. OCLC\u00a073502978. Futuyma D (1998). Evolutionary Biology (3rd ed.). Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates. ISBN\u00a00-87893-189-9. LCCN\u00a097037947. OCLC\u00a037560100. Golding B, ed. (1994). Non-Neutral Evolution: Theories and Molecular Data. New York: Chapman & Hall. ISBN\u00a00-412-05391-8. LCCN\u00a093047006. OCLC\u00a029638235. \"Papers from a workshop sponsored by the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research.\" Hartl DL, Clark AG (2007). Principles of Population Genetics (4th ed.). Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates. ISBN\u00a0978-0-87893-308-2. LCCN\u00a02006036153. OCLC\u00a075087956. Hedrick PW (2005). Genetics of Populations (3rd ed.). Boston, MA: Jones and Bartlett Publishers. ISBN\u00a00-7637-4772-6. LCCN\u00a02004056666. OCLC\u00a056194719. Hey J, Fitch WM, Ayala FJ, eds. (2005). Systematics and the Origin of Species: On Ernst Mayr's 100th Anniversary. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press. ISBN\u00a0978-0-309-09536-5. LCCN\u00a02005017917. OCLC\u00a070745851. Howard DJ, Berlocher SH, eds. (1998). Endless Forms: Species and Speciation. New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN\u00a0978-0-19-510901-6. LCCN\u00a097031461. OCLC\u00a037545522. Kimura M, Ohta T (1971). Theoretical Aspects of Population Genetics. Monographs in Population Biology. 4. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. ISBN\u00a00-691-08096-8. LCCN\u00a075155963. OCLC\u00a0299867647. Larson EJ (2004). Evolution: The Remarkable History of a Scientific Theory. Modern Library Chronicles. 17. New York: Modern Library. ISBN\u00a00-679-64288-9. LCCN\u00a02003064888. OCLC\u00a053483597. Li W, Graur D (1991). Fundamentals of Molecular Evolution. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates. ISBN\u00a00-87893-452-9. LCCN\u00a090043581. OCLC\u00a022113526. Lynch M (2007). The Origins of Genome Architecture. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates. ISBN\u00a0978-0-87893-484-3. LCCN\u00a02007000012. OCLC\u00a077574049. Miller G (2000). The Mating Mind: How Sexual Choice Shaped the Evolution of Human Nature. New York: Doubleday. ISBN\u00a00-385-49516-1. LCCN\u00a000022673. OCLC\u00a043648482. Sadava D, Heller HC, Orians GH, Purves WK, Hillis DM (2008). Life: The Science of Biology. II: Evolution, Diversity and Ecology (8th ed.). Sunderland, MA; Gordonsville, VA: Sinauer Associates; W. H. Freeman and Company. ISBN\u00a0978-0-7167-7674-1. LCCN\u00a02006031320. OCLC\u00a071632224. Stevenson JC (1991). Dictionary of Concepts in Physical Anthropology. Reference Sources for the Social Sciences and Humanities. 10. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. ISBN\u00a00-313-24756-0. LCCN\u00a090022815. OCLC\u00a022732327. Tian JP (2008). Evolution Algebras and their Applications. Lecture Notes in Mathematics. 1921. Berlin; New York: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-74284-5. ISBN\u00a0978-3-540-74283-8. LCCN\u00a02007933498. OCLC\u00a0173807298. Zbl\u00a01136.17001. Wolf JB, Brodie ED, Wade MJ, eds. (2000). Epistasis and the Evolutionary Process. Oxford, UK; New York: Oxford University Press. ISBN\u00a00-19-512806-0. LCCN\u00a099046515. OCLC\u00a042603105. Zimmer C (2001). Evolution: The Triumph of an Idea. Introduction by Stephen Jay Gould; foreword by Richard Hutton (1st ed.). New York: HarperCollins. ISBN\u00a00-06-019906-7. LCCN\u00a02001024077. OCLC\u00a046359440. External links[edit] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Genetic drift. Sheehy, Bob. \"Population genetics simulation program\". Radford, VA: Radford University. Retrieved 2015-12-21. Grimes, Bill. \"Genetic Drift Simulation\". Tucson, Arizona: The University of Arizona. Retrieved 2016-08-25. vteEvolutionary biology Evolutionary history of life Index of evolutionary biology articles Introduction Outline of evolution Timeline of evolution Evolution Abiogenesis Adaptation Adaptive radiation Cladistics Coevolution Common descent Convergence Divergence Earliest known life forms Evidence of evolution Extinction Event Gene-centered view Homology Last universal common ancestor Macroevolution Microevolution Origin of life Panspermia Parallel evolution Speciation Taxonomy Population genetics Biodiversity Gene flow Genetic drift Mutation Natural selection Variation Development Canalisation Evolutionary developmental biology Inversion Modularity Phenotypic plasticity Of taxa Birds origin Brachiopods Molluscs Cephalopods Dinosaurs Fish Fungi Insects butterflies Life Mammals cats canids wolves dogs hyenas dolphins and whales horses primates humans lemurs sea cows Plants Reptiles Spiders Tetrapods Viruses influenza Of organs Cell DNA Flagella Eukaryotes symbiogenesis chromosome endomembrane system mitochondria nucleus plastids In animals eye hair auditory ossicle nervous system brain Of processes Aging Death Programmed cell death Avian flight Biological complexity Cooperation Color vision in primates Emotion Empathy Ethics Eusociality Immune system Metabolism Monogamy Morality Mosaic evolution Multicellularity Sexual reproduction Gamete differentiation/sexes Life cycles/nuclear phases Mating types Meiosis Sex-determination Snake venom Tempo and modes Gradualism/Punctuated equilibrium/Saltationism Micromutation/Macromutation Uniformitarianism/Catastrophism Speciation Allopatric Anagenesis Catagenesis Cladogenesis Cospeciation Ecological Hybrid Parapatric Peripatric Reinforcement Sympatric History Renaissance and Enlightenment Transmutation of species Charles Darwin On the Origin of Species History of paleontology Transitional fossil Blending inheritance Mendelian inheritance The eclipse of Darwinism Modern synthesis History of molecular evolution Extended evolutionary synthesis Philosophy Darwinism Alternatives Catastrophism Lamarckism Orthogenesis Mutationism Saltationism Structuralism Spandrel Theistic Vitalism Teleology in biology Related Biogeography Ecological genetics Molecular evolution Phylogenetics Tree Polymorphism Protocell Systematics Category Portal vtePopulation geneticsKey concepts Hardy-Weinberg law Genetic linkage Identity by descent Linkage disequilibrium Fisher's fundamental theorem Neutral theory Shifting balance theory Price equation Coefficient of inbreeding and relationship Fitness Heritability Selection Natural Sexual Artificial Ecological Effects of selectionon genomic variation Genetic hitchhiking Background selection Genetic drift Small population size Population bottleneck Founder effect Coalescence Balding\u2013Nichols model Founders R. A. Fisher J. B. S. Haldane Sewall Wright Related topics Evolution Microevolution Evolutionary game theory Fitness landscape Genetic genealogy Quantitative genetics Index of evolutionary biology articles Evolutionary biology portal Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Genetic_drift&oldid=878281858\" Categories: Population geneticsEvolutionary biologyGenetic genealogyHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionUse dmy dates from January 2011Good articlesCS1: long volume valueCommons category link is on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces ArticleTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages \u0627\u0644\u0639\u0631\u0628\u064a\u0629Asturianu\u09ac\u09be\u0982\u09b2\u09be\u0411\u0430\u0448\u04a1\u043e\u0440\u0442\u0441\u0430\u0411\u044a\u043b\u0433\u0430\u0440\u0441\u043a\u0438BosanskiCatal\u00e0\u010ce\u0161tinaDanskDeutschEesti\u0395\u03bb\u03bb\u03b7\u03bd\u03b9\u03ba\u03acEspa\u00f1olEsperantoEuskara\u0641\u0627\u0631\u0633\u06ccFran\u00e7aisGalego\ud55c\uad6d\uc5b4\u0540\u0561\u0575\u0565\u0580\u0565\u0576\u0939\u093f\u0928\u094d\u0926\u0940HrvatskiBahasa IndonesiaInterlingua\u00cdslenskaItaliano\u05e2\u05d1\u05e8\u05d9\u05ea\u10e5\u10d0\u10e0\u10d7\u10e3\u10da\u10d8Krey\u00f2l ayisyen\u041a\u044b\u0440\u0433\u044b\u0437\u0447\u0430Lietuvi\u0173Magyar\u041c\u0430\u043a\u0435\u0434\u043e\u043d\u0441\u043a\u0438Bahasa MelayuNederlands\u65e5\u672c\u8a9eNorskNorsk nynorskO\u02bbzbekcha/\u045e\u0437\u0431\u0435\u043a\u0447\u0430PolskiPortugu\u00easRom\u00e2n\u0103\u0420\u0443\u0441\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439ScotsSimple EnglishSloven\u0161\u010dina\u0421\u0440\u043f\u0441\u043a\u0438 / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / \u0441\u0440\u043f\u0441\u043a\u043e\u0445\u0440\u0432\u0430\u0442\u0441\u043a\u0438SuomiSvenska\u0e44\u0e17\u0e22T\u00fcrk\u00e7e\u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0441\u044c\u043a\u0430\u5434\u8bed\u4e2d\u6587 Edit links This page was last edited on 14 January 2019, at 00:38\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "Permafrost | Definition of Permafrost by Merriam-Webster SINCE 1828 Menu JOIN MWU Gain access to thousands of additional definitions and advanced search features\u2014ad free! JOIN NOW GAMES BROWSE THESAURUS WORD OF THE DAY VIDEO MORE WORD OF THE DAY VIDEO WORDS AT PLAY FAVORITES WORDS AT PLAY FAVORITES Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram dictionary thesaurus JOIN MWU GAMES THESAURUS WORD OF THE DAY VIDEO WORDS AT PLAY FAVORITES Follow: Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram permafrost noun per\u00b7\u200bma\u00b7\u200bfrost | \\ \u02c8p\u0259r-m\u0259-\u02ccfr\u022fst \\ Definition of permafrost : a permanently frozen layer at variable depth below the surface in frigid regions of a planet (such as earth) Examples of permafrost in a Sentence Recent Examples on the Web Worse, melting permafrost contributes to global warming itself. \u2014 David Grossman, Popular Mechanics, \"Melting Permafrost Poses a Huge Danger to Artic Infrastructure,\" 11 Dec. 2018 Warmer summers have also meant that diseases, long locked in the Arctic permafrost, may thaw and spread among herds, though scientists aren\u2019t completely sure how much of an impact this is having. \u2014 Brian Resnick, Vox, \"The Arctic has lost 2.6 million reindeer over the past 20 years,\" 11 Dec. 2018 An example would be the thawing of large areas of permafrost, which could release the carbon stored in them. \u2014 John Timmer, Ars Technica, \"Researchers suggest we could tip into a hothouse Earth\u2014here\u2019s what that means,\" 10 Aug. 2018 In the Arctic and Antarctic, warming can lead to the melting of permafrost, releasing carbon dioxide that has been frozen for millennia. \u2014 Avery Thompson, Popular Mechanics, \"Scientists Warn Earth's Ecosystems Could Start Releasing CO2 On Their Own,\" 7 Aug. 2018 In addition, the decomposition of the permafrost also releases toxic gases, otherwise known as greenhouse gases, like carbon dioxide and methane, which accelerate climate change and make the planet increasingly warmer. \u2014 Elly Belle, Teen Vogue, \"Arctic Wolf Spiders Are Getting Bigger and It Could Slow Part of Climate Change,\" 24 July 2018 Melting of the permafrost was mentioned no less than four times. \u2014 Anchorage Daily News, \"Readers write: Letters to the editor, January 15, 2018,\" 15 Jan. 2018 Arctic lands are covered by areas of ground known as permafrost that have been frozen since the Pleistocene. \u2014 Paul Mann, Smithsonian, \"Can Bringing Back Mammoths Help Stop Climate Change?,\" 14 May 2018 As a warming climate thaws this permafrost, more and more of the older carbon will be broken down by microbes and released as carbon dioxide or methane, with the potential to greatly warm the planet. \u2014 Chris Mooney, Anchorage Daily News, \"Ancient carbon is coming from Arctic soil. It might be fine, but it might be terrible.,\" 1 Mar. 2018 These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'permafrost.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback. See More First Known Use of permafrost 1943, in the meaning defined above History and Etymology for permafrost permanent + frost Keep scrolling for more Learn More about permafrost Share permafrost Resources for permafrost Time Traveler! Explore the year a word first appeared Dictionary Entries near permafrost perm Perm' permaculture permafrost permalloy permanence permanency Statistics for permafrost Look-up Popularity Time Traveler for permafrost The first known use of permafrost was in 1943 See more words from the same year Keep scrolling for more More Definitions for permafrost permafrost noun English Language Learners Definition of permafrost technical : a layer of soil that is always frozen in very cold regions of the world See the full definition for permafrost in the English Language Learners Dictionary More from Merriam-Webster on permafrost Rhyming Dictionary: Words that rhyme with permafrost Britannica.com: Encyclopedia article about permafrost Comments on permafrost What made you want to look up permafrost? Please tell us where you read or heard it (including the quote, if possible). Show Comments Hide Comments WORD OF THE DAY smithereens fragments or bits Get Word of the Day daily email! Test Your Vocabulary A Green Quiz What is the best definition of green-eyed monster? corruption nauseated a voracious appetite jealousy Test your visual vocabulary with our 10-question challenge! TAKE THE QUIZ Test Your Knowledge - and learn some interesting things along the way. TAKE THE QUIZ Love words? Need even more definitions? Subscribe to America's largest dictionary and get thousands more definitions and advanced search\u2014ad free! Merriam-Webster unabridged Words at Play Can 'Exponential' Mean 'Lots'? (Or, 'How to Disappoint Your Math Teacher') Playing the 'Wild Card' It can be anything. Why Is 'Celtic' Pronounced Two Ways? \\SELT\\ is the older one 6 Words That Come from Names of Places When the name on the map gets its own meaning Ask the Editors A Look at Uncommon Onomatopoeia Some imitative words are more surprising than others When Body Parts Are Also Verbs Head, shoulders, metaphors, and toes Literally How to use a word that (literally) drives some people nuts. Is Singular 'They' a Better Choice? The awkward case of 'his or her' Word Games A Green Quiz How many questions can you answer about the word \"green\"? Take the quiz Return of Name that Color! Additional colors! More obscure than before! Take the quiz Name That Thing Test your visual vocabulary with our 10-question challenge! Take the quiz Word Winder's CrossWinder A game of winding words. Play the game Merriam Webster Learn a new word every day. Delivered to your inbox! OTHER MERRIAM-WEBSTER DICTIONARIES SPANISH CENTRAL LEARNER'S ESL DICTIONARY WORDCENTRAL FOR KIDS VISUAL DICTIONARY SCRABBLE\u00ae WORD FINDER MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S UNABRIDGED DICTIONARY BRITANNICA ENGLISH - ARABIC TRANSLATION NGLISH - SPANISH-ENGLISH TRANSLATION FOLLOW US Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Browse the Dictionary: a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z 0-9 Home Help Apps About Us Shop Advertising Info Dictionary API Contact Us Word of the Year Law Dictionary Medical Dictionary Privacy Policy Terms of Use Browse the Thesaurus Browse the Medical Dictionary Browse the Legal Dictionary Browse the Spanish-English Dictionary \u00a9 2019 Merriam-Webster, Incorporated Learn More from M-W Trending: 'Crawdad': A Novel's Title Sings Learn More from M-W Can 'Exponential' Mean 'Lots'? Learn More from M-W A Green Quiz Learn More from M-W 6 Words Derived from Place Names Learn More from M-W A Look at Uncommon Onomatopoeia", "(PDF) Challenges and solutions for long-term permafrost borehole temperature monitoring and data interpretation | Academic Article We use cookies to make interactions with our website easy and meaningful, to better understand the use of our services, and to tailor advertising. For further information, including about cookie settings, please read our Cookie Policy . By continuing to use this site, you consent to the use of cookies.Got ittopSee all \u203a8 CitationsSee all \u203a44 ReferencesSee all \u203a9 FiguresDownload citationShare Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Google+ RedditDownload full-text PDFChallenges and solutions for long-term permafrost borehole temperature monitoring and data interpretationArticle (PDF Available)\u2002in\u2002Geographica helvetica 71(2):121-131\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0June 2016\u2002with\u2002123 ReadsDOI: 10.5194/gh-71-121-2016 Cite this publication Rachel Luethi7.5Swiss National Park Marcia Phillips27.15WSL Institute for Snow and Avalanche Research SLFAbstractLong-term borehole temperature monitoring in mountain permafrost environments is challenging un- der the hostile conditions reigning in alpine environments. On the basis of data measured in the SLF borehole network we show three situations where ground temperature data should be interpreted with caution. (i) Ther- mistors have the tendency to drift, particularly if exposed to moisture or mechanical strain. This induces apparent warming or cooling, which can be difficult to differentiate from real ground temperature changes. Recalibration of thermistor chains is impossible if they cannot be extracted as a result of borehole deformation in creeping permafrost terrain. A solution using zero-curtain-based detection of drift and correction of data is presented. This method is however limited to the active layer, due to the lack of a reference temperature at greater depth. (ii) In contrast to drift-induced apparent warming, actual warming may be induced by natural processes or by the effects of construction activity. (iii) Control data from neighbouring boreholes are sometimes used to fill data gaps and discern drift \u2013 however these data may only underline the strong spatial variability of ground temperatures rather than provide measurement redundancy. A selection of recently observed problems regarding borehole monitoring in a hostile measurement environment are discussed, and advantages and possible drawbacks of various solutions including measurement redundancy or alternate instrumentation are presented.Discover the world's research15+ million members118+ million publications700k+ research projectsJoin for free Figures - uploaded by Rachel LuethiAuthor contentAll content in this area was uploaded by Rachel Luethi Map of Switzerland showing the location of the SLF permafrost monitoring boreholes (sites containing PERMOS boreholes maintained by SLF are shown in light grey). The boreholes presented in this paper have been underlined. Reproduced with the authorisation of swisstopo (K606-01).\u2026\u00a0 . Overview of the presented sites of the SLF permafrost borehole temperature monitoring network. An asterisk indicates boreholes which are part of the Swiss Permafrost Monitoring Network PERMOS.\u2026\u00a0 Schematic zero-curtain-based borehole temperature data correction.\u2026\u00a0 +5Measured and processed borehole temperature data at 2 and 3 m depth (in the active layer) at Schafberg B1.\u2026\u00a0Content uploaded by Rachel LuethiAuthor contentAll content in this area was uploaded by Rachel Luethi on Jun 09, 2016 Download full-text PDF Geogr. Helv., 71, 121\u2013131, 2016www.geogr-helv.net/71/121/2016/doi:10.5194/gh-71-121-2016\u00a9 Author(s) 2016. CC Attribution 3.0 License.supported byChallenges and solutions for long-term permafrostborehole temperature monitoring and data interpretationRachel Luethi and Marcia PhillipsWSL Institute for Snow and Avalanche Research \u2013 SLF, Fl\u00fcelastrasse 11, 7260 Davos Dorf, SwitzerlandCorrespondence to: Rachel Luethi (rachel.luethi@slf.ch)Received: 4 March 2015 \u2013 Revised: 29 April 2016 \u2013 Accepted: 2 May 2016 \u2013 Published: 9 June 2016Abstract. Long-term borehole temperature monitoring in mountain permafrost environments is challenging un-der the hostile conditions reigning in alpine environments. On the basis of data measured in the SLF boreholenetwork we show three situations where ground temperature data should be interpreted with caution. (i) Ther-mistors have the tendency to drift, particularly if exposed to moisture or mechanical strain. This induces apparentwarming or cooling, which can be dif\ufb01cult to differentiate from real ground temperature changes. Recalibrationof thermistor chains is impossible if they cannot be extracted as a result of borehole deformation in creeping per-mafrost terrain. A solution using zero-curtain-based detection of drift and correction of data is presented. Thismethod is however limited to the active layer, due to the lack of a reference temperature at greater depth. (ii) Incontrast to drift-induced apparent warming, actual warming may be induced by natural processes or by the effectsof construction activity. (iii) Control data from neighbouring boreholes are sometimes used to \ufb01ll data gaps anddiscern drift \u2013 however these data may only underline the strong spatial variability of ground temperatures ratherthan provide measurement redundancy. A selection of recently observed problems regarding borehole moni-toring in a hostile measurement environment are discussed, and advantages and possible drawbacks of varioussolutions including measurement redundancy or alternate instrumentation are presented.1 IntroductionMountain permafrost is sensitive to climate change and theresulting changes in snow cover or air temperature sinceground temperatures are often close to 0 \u25e6C (e.g. Christiansenet al., 2010; Harris et al., 2003; PERMOS, 2013; ZenklusenMutter et al., 2010). Recently increasing interest in the ther-mal state of permafrost is related to the construction of infras-tructure (Bommer et al., 2010), rock-slope instability (e.g.Fischer et al., 2012; Gruber and Haeberli, 2007; Huggel etal., 2010; Krautblatter et al., 2013), rock glacier (e.g. Aren-son et al., 2002; Kenner et al., 2014) and talus slope dynamics(e.g. Delaloye and Lambiel, 2005) and in general to naturalhazards from permafrost areas (e.g. Huggel et al., 2010; Ra-vanel and Deline, 2011; Luethi et al., 2015).The longest available mountain permafrost borehole tem-perature series worldwide is measured at Murt\u00e8l-Corvatschrock glacier in the Eastern Swiss Alps and was started in1987 (Haeberli et al., 1988). Nowadays the data are incor-porated in the Swiss Permafrost Monitoring Network PER-MOS (e.g. PERMOS, 2013). In addition to the borehole datain the large of\ufb01cial permafrost monitoring networks (mainlynational ones) like PERMOS, NORPERM (Juliussen et al.,2010) and several networks in North America (Smith et al.,2010), which are all incorporated in the Global TerrestrialNetwork for Permafrost (GTN-P; Burgess et al., 2000), thereare also a number of other boreholes in which permafrosttemperatures are monitored. In the Swiss Alps the latter areoften located close to infrastructure and can reveal informa-tion on the in\ufb02uence of construction activity and infrastruc-ture as well as on the evolution of permafrost.Most temperature measurement series in the Alps are stilltoo short to elicit trends but are extremely valuable for thedetection of thermal processes in complex terrain (ZenklusenMutter et al., 2010; Zenklusen Mutter and Phillips, 2012a).Borehole temperature data can also be used to enhance pro-cess understanding in combination with other measurementslike borehole deformation measurements (Arenson et al.,2002), borehole logging (Scapozza et al., 2015), geophysicalPublished by Copernicus Publications for the Geographisch-Ethnographische Gesellschaft Z\u00fcrich & Association Suisse de G\u00e9ographie. 122 R. Luethi and M. Phillips: Long-term permafrost borehole temperaturemethods (e.g. Hauck et al., 2011; Hilbich et al., 2009; Kraut-blatter and Hauck, 2007; Vonder M\u00fchll et al., 2000) or kine-matic monitoring with continuous automatic GPS measure-ments or sporadically with total stations, differential GPS orterrestrial laser scanning (e.g. Delaloye et al., 2008, 2010;Kenner et al., 2014; Roer et al., 2005; Scapozza et al., 2014;Wirz et al., 2014).The prerequisite for any form of borehole temperaturedata analysis is that the data are of high quality and havelong-term continuity. This is a challenging objective for in-struments located at exposed sites in high alpine terrain.One of the problems encountered over time with the use ofthermistors is sensor drift, which induces apparent temper-ature changes. Average relative root mean square drift wasfound to be 0.19 \u00b10.08 \u00b5K week\u22121(9.88 \u00d710\u22126\u00b14.16 \u00d710\u22126K year\u22121) in a study on the long-term stability of fourcommercially available glass bead thermistors (Lawton andPatterson, 2002). These authors found that positive thermis-tor drift is exacerbated by humidity \u2013 a ubiquitous problemin alpine environments. Borehole instruments can be sub-ject to mechanical strain, which can also lead to erroneousdata. Kreider et al. (2008) state that, in electronic devicesthat depend on a change of resistance, stretching of the mem-brane lengthens the resistive element, thereby increasing re-sistance. This induces an apparent decrease in the tempera-ture registered by thermistors. It is therefore essential to beable to distinguish sensor drift from real temperature modi\ufb01-cations to avoid making false conjectures on the state of thepermafrost.The aim of this paper is to discuss some of the challengespresented by long-term temperature measurements in bore-holes in mountain permafrost \u2013 both from a technical pointof view and with regard to data interpretation. Possible solu-tions are discussed. Examples from the SLF permafrost mon-itoring network are presented. Data acquisition is described,data processing is explained and selected results showingspeci\ufb01c problems and various thermal phenomena are pre-sented. Particular emphasis is given to apparent temperaturechanges caused by sensor drift and to data correction withinthe active layer.2 Data2.1 Borehole temperature measurements and dataaccessThe SLF permafrost borehole temperature monitoring net-work includes 25 boreholes at 13 sites in the Swiss Alps(Fig. 1, Table 1). Nine of these are included in the SwissPermafrost Monitoring Network (PERMOS). The others arenot because they were drilled in the context of constructionprojects and are often close to mountain infrastructure andso not ideally suited for undisturbed permafrost monitoringwith regard to climate change. The boreholes are locatedat elevations above approximately 2400 m a.s.l. and coverdifferent landforms like crests, rock walls, talus slopes androck glaciers with contrasting temperatures and ice contents.They are up to 53 m deep and the longest measurement se-ries were started in 1996. In this paper we discuss data fromthe boreholes at Eggishorn, Schafberg, Matterhorn, Gr\u00e4chenand Arolla. The sites are brie\ufb02y described in Sect. 2.2. TheSchafberg and Matterhorn boreholes are part of PERMOS.The boreholes are equipped with grouted watertight PVCtubes. The instruments are placed in watertight boxes in con-crete wells and are grounded for protection against lightning.Temperatures are measured with calibrated high-precision(\u00b10.01 \u25e6C) NTC (negative temperature coef\ufb01cient) YellowSprings Instruments (YSI) 48006/8 thermistors at variousdepths in 2-hourly to daily resolution, and data are stored inCampbell CR10X and C1000 data loggers. Power is providedby two 12 V lithium batteries. All thermistors were calibratedin the laboratory at 0 \u25e6C in ice\u2013water mixtures before beinginstalled.The SLF permafrost monitoring network has been in-cluded in the research experiment platform SwissExperi-ment (Dawes et al., 2008; Jeung et al., 2010) in 2015.Metadata were registered in the SwissExperiment meta-data wiki (http://www.swiss-experiment.ch/index.php/SLF_permafrost_borehole_data). Processed data are availableupon request on the internet (http://montblanc.slf.ch:22001/)via a GSN middleware (Aberer et al., 2006, 2007). It is trans-mitted automatically for locations where data are read out re-motely and updated periodically for all other locations. PER-MOS data are available online (http://dx.doi.org/10.13093/permos-2016-01.)2.2 Site descriptions2.2.1 EggishornThe Eggishorn borehole is located at 2840 m a.s.l., at thebase of a cable-car pylon in a steep southeast-facing screeslope. The borehole is 10.5 m deep and equipped with 15YSI 44006 thermistors. It was drilled in 2008 by the cable-car company for permafrost monitoring purposes.2.2.2 SchafbergThe Schafberg site has two neighbouring boreholes locatedon the west-facing rock glacier Foura da l\u2019Amd Ursina abovePontresina in the Upper Engadine. They were both drilledin 1990 by VAW (ETH Zurich) and later on transferred tothe SLF permafrost monitoring network in 1997 and to PER-MOS in 2000. B1 at 2754 m a.s.l. is equipped with 16 YSI44006 thermistors and B2 at 2732 ma.s.l. with 12 YSI 44006thermistors.2.2.3 Matterhorn, H\u00f6rnli RidgeThe Matterhorn borehole is located in a \ufb02at sector of the east-ern H\u00f6rnli ridge of the mountain at 3270 m a.s.l., just aboveGeogr. Helv., 71, 121\u2013131, 2016 www.geogr-helv.net/71/121/2016/ R. Luethi and M. Phillips: Long-term permafrost borehole temperature 123Table 1. Overview of the presented sites of the SLF permafrost borehole temperature monitoring network. An asterisk indicates boreholeswhich are part of the Swiss Permafrost Monitoring Network PERMOS.Site Landform Borehole(s) Coordinates Elevation(m a.s.l.)Measurement periodMont Dolin talus slope Arolla B2 46.02663\u25e6N,7.45473\u25e6E2840 16 December 1996 to28 June 2007Arolla B1 46.02677\u25e6N,7.45487\u25e6E2820 16 December 1996 to 7March 2013Eggishorn talus slope Eggishorn 46.42687\u25e6N,8.09365\u25e6E2840 since 27 February 2009Gr\u00e4chen talus slope Gr\u00e4chen Grat 46.17642\u25e6N,7.85910\u25e6E2860 since 18 August 2004Gr\u00e4chen Berg 46.18694\u25e6N,7.86922\u25e6E2450 since 18 November2002Matterhorn rock ridge H\u00f6rnli Ridge B2* 45.98231\u25e6N,7.67600\u25e6E3270 since 8 October 2005Schafberg(Ursina/VAW)rock glacier Schafberg B2* 46.49878\u25e6N,9.92522\u25e6E2732 since 4 October 1996Figure 1. Map of Switzerland showing the location of the SLF permafrost monitoring boreholes (sites containing PERMOS boreholesmaintained by SLF are shown in light grey). The boreholes presented in this paper have been underlined. Reproduced with the authorisationof swisstopo (K606-01).www.geogr-helv.net/71/121/2016/ Geogr. Helv., 71, 121\u2013131, 2016 124 R. Luethi and M. Phillips: Long-term permafrost borehole temperaturethe H\u00f6rnli mountain hut, and is part of PERMOS. The bore-hole was drilled in 2005 in an attempt to \ufb01nd water for thehut and is 53 m deep. It is equipped with 15 YSI 44006 ther-mistors.2.2.4 Gr\u00e4chenTwo 24 m deep boreholes were drilled in 2002 during theplanning phase of a chairlift. They are located adjacent to thechairlift middle station on a northwest-facing talus slope at2450 m a.s.l. Both boreholes are equipped with 12 YSI 44006thermistors.2.2.5 Arolla, Mont DolinThe two 6 m boreholes on the eastern slope of Mont Dolinabove Arolla were drilled in 1996 to monitor experimentalavalanche defence structures in creeping permafrost terrain(Phillips, 2000). They are located in a scree slope at 2840 and2820 m a.s.l. and both equipped with \ufb01ve YSI 44008 thermis-tors. Unfortunately the measurements in these two boreholesat Mont Dolin had to be stopped in 2013 due to the occur-rence of massive rockfall over both boreholes.3 Methods3.1 Data analysis and processingBorehole temperature data were carefully checked and if nec-essary corrected or removed but data gaps were not \ufb01lled. Tocarry out quality controls speci\ufb01c processing routines weredeveloped with R (R Development Core Team, 2011) andapplied to all data. For all processed values a \ufb02ag is set in thedatabase, indicating the procedure with which the value hasbeen changed or deleted.3.1.1 Data \ufb01lteringData were \ufb01ltered on the basis of prede\ufb01ned minimumand/or maximum ground temperature values. Values exceed-ing these were deleted. Filters were applied for all sensorslocated at different depths. Temperature minima and maximawere chosen according to realistic values expected for a cer-tain thermistor: if for example temperatures within the per-mafrost body remain below 0 \u25e6C during the whole measure-ment series it is not probable that single days exhibit temper-atures much above 0 \u25e6C, and therefore a maximum thresholdof a few hundredths of a degree would be chosen. For exam-ples where drift is visible higher thresholds have to be chosenin order to avoid losing data unnecessarily by data \ufb01lteringsince \ufb01ltering is applied before the zero-curtain-based datacorrection.Figure 2. Schematic zero-curtain-based borehole temperature datacorrection.3.1.2 Zero-curtain-based data correctionThe zero curtain refers to the effect maintaining temperaturesof freezing/thawing soils close to 0 \u25e6C due to latent heat re-lease during phase change (Outcalt et al., 1990). This phe-nomenon also occurs within the active layer of permafrost.The zero curtain is the only period during which ground tem-perature remains constant at 0 \u25e6C and thus allows one to eval-uate whether thermistors in the active layer are measuringcorrectly or undergoing sensor drift. A zero-curtain-basedcorrection has been developed which is explained in the fol-lowing and shown schematically in Fig. 2. For a zero-curtain-based correction, the spring or autumn zero curtains of thedifferent years are \ufb01rst detected by applying the followingcriteria: (i) temperature is within a given temperature range(e.g. > \u22120.5 and < 0.5 \u25e6C), and (ii) the temperature gradientdoes not exceed a certain predetermined value. Temperaturegradients are based on the absolute difference to the preced-ing values. Best results were obtained by calculating runningmeans of the whole time series with a window of a few days.The detected zero curtain is checked visually and can be im-proved iteratively by changing the different input parame-ters of the function. Different regressions can be applied (lin-ear, exponential and several polynomial regressions) to theevaluated zero curtain in order to detect and correct thermaldrift. Best \ufb01t seems to be obtained by second-order poly-nomial functions because drift tends to start slowly and in-crease exponentially. Drift can attain several degrees Celsiusover a period of around 5 years. Drift is only corrected forincreasing \ufb01tted values because drift of temperature sensorsrarely results in apparently decreasing temperatures (one ex-ception is discussed in Sect. 4.2). Our observations show thatin Alpine boreholes drift is most often caused by moistureincursion due to damaged borehole tubing, which leads to adecrease in thermal resistivity and thus to apparently increas-ing temperatures.Geogr. Helv., 71, 121\u2013131, 2016 www.geogr-helv.net/71/121/2016/ R. Luethi and M. Phillips: Long-term permafrost borehole temperature 125Zero-curtain-based data correction is only possible withinthe active layer where phase changes at 0 \u25e6C occur. Below,sensors have to be removed for recalibration in the laboratoryto ensure that measurements are correct. This is not alwayspossible, as thermistor chains can be trapped due to boreholedeformation and/or freezing of water at the base of the bore-hole. Observations on mechanical disturbances such as waterintrusion or strain damaging the sensors help to discriminatebetween sensor drift and natural phenomena related to warm-ing permafrost.4 Results showing selected thermal phenomenaregistered in boreholesIn the following subsections, selected processes observed inmountain permafrost and various problems and solutions re-garding measurement techniques are discussed on the ba-sis of temperature data measured in different boreholes inthe SLF permafrost monitoring network. The phenomenashown include apparent warming due to sensor drift, appar-ent cooling caused by the stretching of thermistor cables, ac-tual permafrost degradation caused by construction activityand unexpected contrasts in ground temperature over shortdistances. These examples have been chosen because theyrepresent typical challenges in the context of borehole tem-perature monitoring at present.4.1 Apparent warming induced by sensor driftApparent warming induced by sensor drift was observed inboreholes at Eggishorn and Schafberg. The application ofzero-curtain-based data correction is shown, and its in\ufb02uenceon active layer thickness (ALT) is evaluated.4.1.1 EggishornBorehole temperature measurements from early 2009 on-wards indicated that the active layer was 6m thick. In sum-mer 2011 sudden permafrost degradation occurred to thebase of the borehole (Fig. 3a), and the active layer did notfreeze back completely in winter 2011/2012. This abruptwarming to 10.5 m depth seemed suspicious, so the ther-mistor chain was recalibrated and found to be defect, as itregistered positive temperatures (several tenths of a degreeCelsius) in a 0 \u25e6C ice\u2013water mixture. Dissection of the ther-mistor chain in the laboratory revealed that water had causeddamage to the thermistors, leading to sensor drift and thus toapparently increasing ground temperatures. Lawton and Pat-terson (2002) con\ufb01rm that humidity adversely affects ther-mistor stability. The thermistor chain was replaced, as wasthe logger and special waterproo\ufb01ng measures were taken(e.g. additional heat shrink tubing) to protect the sensorsagainst renewed water in\ufb01ltration.In an attempt to reconstruct the temperature regime withinthe active layer during the period when the thermistorswere faulty, the zero-curtain-based correction explained inSect. 3.2.2 was applied. Ground temperatures were correctedfor all sensors to a depth of 5 m, i.e. within the active layerwith the parameters speci\ufb01ed in Table 2. Temperature databelow were removed after the date at which the sensorswithin the active layer exhibited temperature drift for the \ufb01rsttime. Visual inspection of the measured data clearly indicatesthat drift was also occurring below the active layer. Compar-ison of the thermal contour plot of raw temperature data withthe plot showing the processed data (Fig. 3) shows that thecorrection of ground temperatures to the order of 0.1 \u25e6C oreven less results in signi\ufb01cant changes in the interpretationof active layer duration. This is due to the fact that tempera-ture gradients in the pro\ufb01le are low and ground temperaturesare close to 0 \u25e6C. This method allowed cutting data loss toa certain extent within the active layer. Continued measure-ments with the new thermistor chain will help to understandthe processes occurring in this warm permafrost substrate.4.1.2 SchafbergBorehole 2 (located at 2754 m a.s.l.) exhibited drift from2010 onwards, so the thermistor chain was replaced in 2013.Analogous to Eggishorn (Sect. 4.1.1) zero-curtain correctionhas been applied with second-order polynomial regression inorder to reconstruct borehole temperature data prior to 2013.The values of the used parameters are speci\ufb01ed in Table 2.Processed borehole temperature data at 2 and 3 m depth areshown in Fig. 4. Using these processed data, annual maxi-mum active layer thicknesses have been calculated (Fig. 5).Even though they do not represent true temperatures and sen-sors below the active layer cannot be corrected, they give anindication on the evolution of the temperatures in the activelayer.4.2 Apparent cooling induced by stretching of thermistorcablesThe instruments in boreholes in mountain permafrost can un-dergo strong lateral deformation (e.g. due to the presenceof shear horizons) leading to thermistor loss through shear-ing (Zenklusen and Phillips, 2012b). Borehole instrumentscan also be subject to longitudinal deformation, caused byground subsidence or mechanical strain. Stretching of ther-mistor cables lengthens the resistive element, thereby in-creasing resistance (Kreider et al., 2008). This causes an ap-parent decrease in ground temperature when using NTC ther-mistors.The Matterhorn borehole data shows initial warming fol-lowed by decreasing temperatures at depths signi\ufb01cantly be-low the active layer (Fig. 6), particularly between 20 and40 m depth. This phenomenon started after snowmelt washed\ufb01ne-grained material into the borehole tubing in July 2008,making it impossible to extract the thermistors thereafter.This \u201ccementing\u201d of the tube may have induced stretchingwww.geogr-helv.net/71/121/2016/ Geogr. Helv., 71, 121\u2013131, 2016 126 R. Luethi and M. Phillips: Long-term permafrost borehole temperatureFigure 3. Contour plots of measured borehole temperature data at Eggishorn at several depths (a) and the corresponding zero-curtain-corrected ground temperatures and removed data for unveri\ufb01able values measured below the active layer (b).Table 2. Values used for the zero-curtain-based borehole temperature correction for Eggishorn and Schafberg B1.Borehole Depth (m) Temperature Temperature Window of Correctionrange (\u25e6C) gradient (\u25e6C) running mean methodEggishorn 0.5 \u22120.15\u20130.25 0.003 40 h exponential1.0 \u22120.18\u20130.15 0.0006 80 h exponential1.5 \u22120.2\u20130.3 0.0015 40 h second-order polynomial2.0 \u22120.2\u20130.3 0.0015 40 h second-order polynomial2.5 \u22120.3\u20130.1 0.0015 40 h second-order polynomial3.0 \u22120.2\u20130.3 0.0015 40 h second-order polynomial3.5 \u22120.05\u20130.5 0.0008 40 h second-order polynomial4.0 \u22120.1\u20130.2 0.0005 40 h second-order polynomial4.5 \u22120.1\u20130.5 0.0005 40 h second-order polynomial5.0 \u22120.1\u20130.045 0.0001 50 h second-order polynomialSchafberg B1 2.0 \u22120.3\u20130.25 0.005 15 days second-order polynomial3.0 \u22120.05\u20130.3 0.005 20 days second-order polynomial4.0 \u22120.3\u20130.25 0.005 15 days second-order polynomialof some thermistor cables, causing the apparent temperaturedecrease registered since 2008. Due to the lack of a referencetemperature at depth, it is not possible to correct these data.4.3 Warming induced by construction activityConstruction activity in mountain permafrost can in\ufb02uenceboth ground temperature and ice content (Bommer et al.,2010) and eventually lead to mass movements (e.g. Ravanelet al., 2013) or to creep and/or subsidence due to warmingand ice loss. These processes can affect the geometry of in-frastructure, causing damage and substantially shortening itsdesign life. As a result, specially adapted technical measuresand construction materials need to be used in substrates withnegative ground temperatures \u2013 and wherever possible, ice-rich ground should be avoided (Bommer et al., 2009). High-quality borehole temperature measurements are therefore es-sential in the planning phase of mountain infrastructure.Temperature measurements in the two boreholes nearthe intermediate station of a chairlift at 2450 m a.s.l. aboveGr\u00e4chen show the rapid degradation of permafrost since2003, following the formation of a supra-permafrost talik inplace of the active layer and massive intra-permafrost talikGeogr. Helv., 71, 121\u2013131, 2016 www.geogr-helv.net/71/121/2016/ R. Luethi and M. Phillips: Long-term permafrost borehole temperature 127Figure 4. Measured and processed borehole temperature data at 2and 3 m depth (in the active layer) at Schafberg B1.Figure 5. Maximum annual active layer thicknesses of raw and pro-cessed borehole temperature data at Schafberg B1.formation (Fig. 7). This rapid thawing can be attributed tothe construction of the chairlift midway station during theexceptionally hot summer 2003, when a large pit had to beexcavated for the foundations. The structure was speci\ufb01callydesigned for this site: it is \ufb02exible and its three-point geome-try can constantly be adapted to the changing substrate con-ditions inducing subsidence during ice loss (Phillips et al.,2006). The credibility of the borehole temperature data at thissite is underlined by the fact that the permafrost degradationwas registered in two boreholes simultaneously, underliningthe utility of redundant measurements. In addition, data mea-sured in boreholes within a radius of a few hundred metres(Ritigraben and Seetalhorn) helped to con\ufb01rm that the per-mafrost thaw described above was very local and can be at-tributed to the in\ufb02uence of the construction activity.Figure 6. Contour plot of ground temperatures in the Matterhorn,H\u00f6rnli Ridge, borehole with apparent cooling effects at depth.Measurements carried out in boreholes located close toeach other can be useful to identify technical problems suchas sensor drift or unexpected thermal anomalies, caused forexample by air or water \ufb02uxes within the ground, whichcould otherwise be interpreted as measurement errors them-selves. In contrast, they sometimes also allow one to discernthe high spatial variability of ground temperature in moun-tainous terrain over short distances.4.4 Contrasting ground temperatures over shortdistancesTemperature measurements in two 6 m boreholes on the east-ern slope of Mont Dolin above Arolla are shown in Fig. 8.Surprising contrasts in ground temperature can be observedhere over a very short distance. Permafrost is completelyabsent in borehole B1, which is only affected by seasonalfrost to varying depths (depending on the depth and dura-tion of the winter snow cover) and remains unfrozen theremainder of the year. In contrast, permafrost is present inborehole B2, which is only 30 m away but higher up onthe slope. The permafrost appears to be quite ice-rich here,as active layer thickness remained rather constant at around2.5 m depth over the measurement period between 1996 and2011, whereas active layers thickened in other talus slopes inthe Swiss Alps during this period (e.g. during the 2003 heatwave) (PERMOS, 2007). High ice contents below the activelayer typically lead to constant active layer thicknesses dueto the latent heat required to melt ice (Zenklusen Mutter andPhillips, 2012a).www.geogr-helv.net/71/121/2016/ Geogr. Helv., 71, 121\u2013131, 2016 128 R. Luethi and M. Phillips: Long-term permafrost borehole temperatureFigure 7. Contour plots of ground temperatures in two boreholes at the intermediate station of a chairlift above Gr\u00e4chen showing permafrostdegradation at depth (a) and supra-permafrost and intra-permafrost talik formation leading to permafrost degradation (b).5 DiscussionOver the years various technical challenges related to themeasurement of ground temperature in boreholes have be-come apparent and have been solved with technical solutionsand/or the post-processing of thermal data. Measurement un-certainties of high-precision thermistors are of the order of afew hundredths of a degree when thermistors are calibratedon a regular basis. However, in Alpine permafrost, recali-bration is often impossible because thermistors are blockedin the borehole tube due to borehole deformation caused bycreep and shearing of the permafrost substrate. It can there-fore be assumed that effective precision may be reduced withtime, which is a problem for long-term measurements. Notbeing able to recalibrate thermistors leads to a further chal-lenge, namely in distinguishing between actually occurringprocesses (e.g. permafrost warming) and sensor drift. In ad-dition, for logistical, technical and \ufb01nancial reasons mostborehole data are only retrieved on-site once or twice a year,which results in huge data losses in the event of technicalproblems. Drift is often not immediately detected unless it re-sults in an obvious suspicious increase in temperatures (e.g.induced by water damage to the sensors), as was registered atEggishorn \u2013 however lateral water/air \ufb02uxes at depth can leadto similar \u201csuspicious\u201d temperature data but are a naturallyoccurring phenomenon of particular interest. Observations ofsuch lateral disturbances in mountain permafrost \u2013 caused bywater (Zenklusen and Phillips, 2012b) or air \ufb02uxes (Phillipset al., 2009) \u2013 have increased recently. Less dramatic sensordrift is often only detected after several years, making it allthe more dif\ufb01cult to discriminate between sensor drift and ac-tually occurring processes. The presented zero-curtain-baseddata correction may help to reduce data loss by the detectionof sensor drift in advance and by correcting drifting temper-atures. Nevertheless every processing routine contains someuncertainties \u2013 that is, the possibility of not detecting the zerocurtain or detecting a wrong zero curtain.Long-term cooling is more suspicious under the presentclimate conditions. The coincident occurrence of mechanicaldisturbance and persistent cooling in the Matterhorn bore-hole makes it doubly suspicious, and it probably has to beattributed to stretching of thermistor cables.Despite being extremely expensive and logistically chal-lenging, measurement redundancy (i.e. the drilling of twoboreholes per site rather than one) allows one to discernnatural processes such as lateral air/water \ufb02uxes, to observeground temperature contrasts over short distances and to de-tect the occurrence of sensor drift. However the Mont Dolinexample shows that measurement redundancy can also un-expectedly reveal contrasting ground temperatures over veryshort distances, which is of interest but cancels the actualaim of carrying out \u201ccontrol\u201d measurements in adjacent bore-holes.The borehole data shown here underline the fact thatchanges can occur at unpredictable depths in the ground andthermistors have the limitation of being located at prede\ufb01neddepths. The ideal measurement technique in changing moun-tain permafrost substrates would be \ufb01bre-optic distributedtemperature sensing (DTS) since it allows one to measuretemperatures over the whole length of the borehole and thusdiscern variations at any depth. However at present, \ufb01rst tests(not shown here) using DTS in the laboratory and in ourGeogr. Helv., 71, 121\u2013131, 2016 www.geogr-helv.net/71/121/2016/ R. Luethi and M. Phillips: Long-term permafrost borehole temperature 129Figure 8. Contour plots of the ground temperatures in two boreholes at Mont Dolin, Arolla. Borehole B1 (a) is not in permafrost whereasB2 (b) is.boreholes have shown that there is too much measurementnoise and the accuracy of the system (0.2 \u25e6C) is not yet highenough to register temperature changes smaller than 0.02 \u25e6C,which is crucial for example in the detection of water dur-ing talik formation (Zenklusen and Phillips, 2012b). In ad-dition, the system has a high energy consumption and is fartoo bulky to \ufb01t into conventional concrete shafts \u2013 which areessential for protection against rockfall and avalanches.The SLF borehole temperature monitoring network hasnot only proven useful to measure the long-term evolutionof permafrost \u2013 it also delivers valuable information on natu-ral and arti\ufb01cial factors in\ufb02uencing temperature and ice con-tent in mountain permafrost. The latter can for example bederived from borehole drilling logs or cores. The data ob-tained are also essential for calibrating and validating numer-ical simulations (e.g. Haberkorn et al., 2015a, b; Magnin etal., 2015; Noetzli et al., 2010).6 ConclusionsLong-term temperature monitoring in boreholes is carriedout to detect the in\ufb02uences of the climate and of local con-ditions such as snow cover depth and duration on the ther-mal state of permafrost. However, data must be interpretedwith care, as thermistors can be subject to drift if they are ex-posed to moisture or their cables are damaged. Thermistorsshould therefore be recalibrated regularly. However, in creep-ing mountain permafrost thermistor chains are often blockedin the boreholes or frozen to the tube, preventing recalibra-tion. Using specially developed R functions we showed thatsemi-automatic zero-curtain-based drift detection and cor-rection are possible for data measured within the active layerthanks to the bi-annual occurrence of 0 \u25e6C for prolonged pe-riods, but not below, due to the lack of a reference tempera-ture. Measurement redundancy is very useful to detect mea-surement errors, natural phenomena such as lateral water/air\ufb02ow or the in\ufb02uence of infrastructure. However, redundancycan also reveal strongly contrasting ground conditions overshort distances (permafrost/no permafrost) and thus could nolonger be useful in this respect. An alternate measurementsystem using distributed temperature sensing which is notsubject to drift would be ideal to measure temperatures overthe entire length of a borehole, but the required accuracy hasnot yet been attained and the hardware is not yet suitable forhostile \ufb01eld conditions.The following phenomena or combinations of these wereobserved in selected boreholes of the SLF monitoring net-work: (i) moisture-induced sensor drift leading to apparentwarming; (ii) mechanically strained cables, causing appar-ent cooling; (iii) evidence of the in\ufb02uence of constructionactivity; and (iv) contrasting ground temperatures over shortdistances.These examples underline that great care must be taken inthe measurement design, the analysis and interpretation oflong-term borehole temperature data as well as in the main-tenance of the measurement infrastructure.www.geogr-helv.net/71/121/2016/ Geogr. Helv., 71, 121\u2013131, 2016 130 R. Luethi and M. Phillips: Long-term permafrost borehole temperature7 Data availabilityData are available from the Swiss Permafrost MonitoringNetwork Database (PERMOS Database) of the Swiss Per-mafrost Monitoring Network (PERMOS) http://dx.doi.org/10.13093/permos-2016-01.The Supplement related to this article is available onlineat doi:10.5194/gh-71-121-2016-supplement.Acknowledgements. We thank M. Hiller, the SLF electronicsgroup and mechanical workshop as well as all \ufb01eld assistants forsupport with \ufb01eld work and measurement equipment. N. Dawes andJ. Caduff-Fiddes are thanked for their support with SwissExperi-ment. We kindly acknowledge Canton Valais and Canton Grisonsas well as all borehole owners (Bergbahnen Gr\u00e4chen, Burgerge-meinde Zermatt, Luftseilbahn Fiesch-Eggishorn). Two of the SLFboreholes presented are incorporated in PERMOS. The quality ofnon-PERMOS SLF borehole temperature data was improved withinthe scope of the IQUASAP (Improving Quality and Availability ofhigh alpine Snow and Permafrost data) project funded by CCES(Competence Center Environment and Sustainability of the ETHZurich). We warmly thank the editor, Martin Hoelzle, as well asBenno Staub and an anonymous reviewer for their constructivefeedback.Edited by: M. HoelzleReviewed by: two anonymous refereesReferencesAberer, K., Hauswirth, M., and Salehi, A.: A middleware for fastand \ufb02exible sensor network deployment, Proceedings of the 32ndinternational conference on very large data bases, Seoul, Korea,1199\u20131202, 2006.Aberer, K., Hauswirth, M., and Salehi, A.: Infrastructure for DataProcessing in Large-Scale Interconnected Sensor Networks, In-ternational Conference on Mobile Data Management 2007, 198\u2013205, doi:10.1109/mdm.2007.36, 2007.Arenson, L., Hoelzle, M., and Springman, S.: Borehole deforma-tion measurements and internal structure of some rock glaciersin Switzerland, Permafrost Periglacial Process., 13, 117\u2013135,doi:10.1002/ppp.414, 2002.Bommer, C., Phillips, M., Keusen, H. R., and Teysseire, P.: Bauenim Permafrost: Ein Leitfaden f\u00fcr die Praxis, WSL-Institut f\u00fcrSchnee- und Lawinenforschung SLF, 2009.Bommer, C., Phillips, M., and Arenson, L. U.: Practical recommen-dations for planning, constructing and maintaining infrastructurein mountain permafrost, Permafrost Periglacial Process., 21, 97\u2013104, doi:10.1002/ppp.679, 2010.Burgess, M., Smith, S., Brown, J., Romanovsky, V., and Hinkel, K.:The Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost (GTNet-P): per-mafrost monitoring contributing to global climate observations,Current Research 2000-E14, 1\u20138, 2000.Christiansen, H. H., Etzelm\u00fcller, B., Isaksen, K., Juliussen, H., Far-brot, H., Humlum, O., Johansson, M., Ingeman-Nielsen, T., Kris-tensen, L., and Hjort, J.: The thermal state of permafrost in thenordic area during the international polar year 2007\u20132009, Per-mafrost Periglacial Process., 21, 156\u2013181, doi:10.1002/ppp.687,2010.Dawes, N., Kumar, K. A., Michel, S., Aberer, K., and Lehning, M.:Sensor Metadata Management and Its Application in Collabo-rative Environmental Research, Fourth IEEE International Con-ference on eScience, 143\u2013150, doi:10.1109/eScience.2008.27,2008.Delaloye, R. and Lambiel, C.: Evidences of winter ascend-ing air circulation throughout talus slopes and rock glacierssituated in the lower belt of alpine discontinuous per-mafrost (Swiss Alps), Norsk geogr. Tidsskr., 59, 194\u2013201,doi:10.1080/00291950510020673, 2005.Delaloye, R., Perruchoud, E., Avian, M., Kaufmann, V., Bodin,X., Hausmann, H., Ikeda, A., K\u00e4\u00e4b, A., Kellerer-Pirklbauer, A.,Krainer, K., Lambiel, C., Mihajlovic, D., Staub, B., Roer, I., andThibert, E.: Recent interannual variations of rock glacier creep inthe European Alps, 9th International Conference on PermafrostFairbanks, Alaska, 343\u2013348, 2008.Delaloye, R., Lambiel, C., and G\u00e4rtner-Roer, I.: Overview of rockglacier kinematics research in the Swiss Alps, Geogr. Helv., 65,135\u2013145, doi:10.5194/gh-65-135-2010, 2010.Fischer, L., Purves, R. S., Huggel, C., Noetzli, J., and Haeberli, W.:On the in\ufb02uence of topographic, geological and cryospheric fac-tors on rock avalanches and rockfalls in high-mountain areas,Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci., 12, 241\u2013254, doi:10.5194/nhess-12-241-2012, 2012.Gruber, S. and Haeberli, W.: Permafrost in steep bedrock slopes andits temperature-related destabilization following climate change,J. Geophys. Res., 112, F02S18, doi:10.1029/2006JF000547,2007.Haberkorn, A., Phillips, M., Kenner, R., Gallos, S., Rhyner, H.,Bavay, M., and Hoelzle, M.: Thermal Regime of Rock and itsRelation to Snow Cover in Steep Alpine Rock Walls: Gemsstock,Central Swiss Alps, Geogr. Ann. Ser. A-phys. Geogr., 97, 579\u2013597, doi:10.1111/geoa.12101, 2015a.Haberkorn, A., Hoelzle, M., Phillips, M., and Kenner, R.: Snowas a driving factor of rock surface temperatures in steeprough rock walls, Cold Reg. Sci. Technol., 118, 64\u201375,doi:10.1016/j.coldregions.2015.06.013, 2015b.Haeberli, W., Huder, J., Keusen, H. R., Pica, J., and R\u00f6thlisberger,H.: Core drilling through rock\u2013glacier permafrost, Tapir, Trond-heim, 937\u2013942, 1988.Harris, C., Vonder M\u00fchll, D., Isaksen, K., Haeberli, W., Sollid, J. L.,King, L., Holmlund, P., Dramis, F., Guglielmin, M., and Palacios,D.: Warming permafrost in European mountains, Glob. Planet.Chang., 39, 215\u2013225, doi:10.1016/j.gloplacha.2003.04.001,2003.Hauck, C., B\u00f6ttcher, M., and Maurer, H.: A new model for esti-mating subsurface ice content based on combined electrical andseismic data sets, The Cryosphere, 5, 453\u2013468, doi:10.5194/tc-5-453-2011, 2011.Hilbich, C., Marescot, L., Hauck, C., Loke, M. H., and M\u00e4usbacher,R.: Applicability of electrical resistivity tomography monitoringto coarse blocky and ice-rich permafrost landforms, PermafrostPeriglacial Process., 20, 269\u2013284, doi:10.1002/ppp.652, 2009.Geogr. Helv., 71, 121\u2013131, 2016 www.geogr-helv.net/71/121/2016/ R. Luethi and M. Phillips: Long-term permafrost borehole temperature 131Huggel, C., Salzmann, N., Allen, S., Caplan-Auerbach, J., Fis-cher, L., Haeberli, W., Larsen, C., Schneider, D., and Wes-sels, R.: Recent and future warm extreme events and high-mountain slope stability, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A: Mathe-matical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 368, 2435\u20132459,doi:10.1098/rsta.2010.0078, 2010.Jeung, H., Sarni, S., Paparrizos, I., Sathe, S., Aberer, K., Dawes,N., Papaioannou, T. G., and Lehning, M.: Effective MetadataManagement in Federated Sensor Networks, Newport Beach,CA, USA, 7\u20139 June 2010, 107\u2013114, doi:10.1109/SUTC.2010.29,2010.Juliussen, H., Christiansen, H. H., Strand, G. S., Iversen, S., Midt-t\u00f8mme, K., and R\u00f8nning, J. S.: NORPERM, the Norwegian Per-mafrost Database \u2013 a TSP NORWAY IPY legacy, Earth Syst. Sci.Data, 2, 235\u2013246, doi:10.5194/essd-2-235-2010, 2010.Kenner, R., B\u00fchler, Y., Delaloye, R., Ginzler, C., and Phillips, M.:Monitoring of high alpine mass movements combining laserscanning with digital airborne photogrammetry, Geomorphol-ogy, 206, 492\u2013504, doi:10.1016/j.geomorph.2013.10.020, 2014.Krautblatter, M. and Hauck, C.: Electrical resistivity tomographymonitoring of permafrost in solid rock walls, J. Geophys. Res.-Earth Surf., 112, F02S20, doi:10.1029/2006jf000546, 2007.Krautblatter, M., Funk, D., and G\u00fcnzel, F. K.: Why per-mafrost rocks become unstable: a rock\u2013ice-mechanical modelin time and space, Earth Surf. Process. Landf., 38, 876\u2013887,doi:10.1002/esp.3374, 2013.Kreider, J. F., Claridge, D. E., and Culp, C. H.: Heating, Ventilatingand Air Conditioning Control Systems, in: Energy managementand conservation handbook, edited by: Kreith, F. and Goswami,D. Y., CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group, Boca Raton FL, 2008.Lawton, K. M. and Patterson, S. R.: Long-term relative stabil-ity of thermistors: Part 2, Precision Engineering, 26, 340\u2013345,doi:10.1016/S0141-6359(02)00110-1, 2002.Luethi, R., Gruber, S., and Ravanel, L.: Modelling transient groundsurface temperatures of past rockfall events: towards a betterunderstanding of failure mechanisms in changing periglacialenvironments, Geogr. Ann. Ser. A-phys. Geogr., 97, 753\u2013767,doi:10.1111/geoa.12114, 2015.Magnin, F., Deline, P., Ravanel, L., Noetzli, J., and Pogliotti, P.:Thermal characteristics of permafrost in the steep alpine rockwalls of the Aiguille du Midi (Mont Blanc Massif, 3842 m a.s.l),The Cryosphere, 9, 109\u2013121, doi:10.5194/tc-9-109-2015, 2015.N\u00f6tzli, J., Gruber, S., and von Poschinger, A.: Modellierungund Messung von Permafrosttemperaturen im Gipfelgratder Zugspitze, Deutschland, Geogr. Helv., 65, 113\u2013123,doi:10.5194/gh-65-113-2010, 2010.Outcalt, S. I., Nelson, F. E., and Hinkel, K. M.: The zero-curtain effect: Heat and mass transfer across an isothermalregion in freezing soil, Water Resour. Res., 26, 1509\u20131516,doi:10.1029/WR026i007p01509, 1990.PERMOS: Permafrost in Switzerland 2008/2009 and 2009/2010,University of Zurich, Zurich, 80 pp., 2013.Phillips, M.: In\ufb02uences of snow-supporting structures on the ther-mal regime of the ground in alpine permafrost terrain, 2000, PhDThesis, WSL Institute of Snow and Avalanche Research SLF,Davos, Switzerland, 146 pp., 2000.Phillips, M.: Avalanche defence strategies and monitoring of twosites in mountain permafrost terrain, Pontresina, Eastern SwissAlps., Nat. Hazards, 39, 353\u2013379, doi:10.1007/s11069-005-6126-x, 2006.Phillips, M., Zenklusen Mutter, E., Kern-Luetschg, M., and Lehn-ing, M.: Rapid degradation of ground ice in a ventilated talusslope: Fl\u00fcela Pass, Swiss Alps, Permafrost Periglacial Process.,20, 1\u201314, doi:10.1002/ppp.638, 2009.Ravanel, L. and Deline, P.: Climate in\ufb02uence on rockfalls in high-Alpine steep rockwalls: The north side of the Aiguilles de Cha-monix (Mont Blanc massif) since the end of the \u2018Little Ice Age\u2019,The Holocene, 21, 357\u2013365, doi:10.1177/0959683610374887,2011.Ravanel, L., Deline, P., Lambiel, C., and Vincent, C.: Instability of aHigh Alpine Rock Ridge: the Lower Ar\u00eate Des Cosmiques, MontBlanc Massif, France, Geogr. Ann. Ser. A-phys. Geogr., 95, 51\u201366, doi:10.1111/geoa.12000, 2013.R Development Core Team: R: A Language and Environment forStatistical Computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing,Vienna, Austria, 2011.Roer, I., K\u00e4\u00e4b, A., and Dikau, R.: Rockglacier acceleration in theTurtmann valley (Swiss Alps): Probable controls, Norsk geogr.Tidsskr., 59, 157-163, doi:10.1080/00291950510020655, 2005.Scapozza, C., Lambiel, C., Bozzini, C., Mari, S., and Conedera,M.: Assessing the rock glacier kinematics on three differenttimescales: a case study from the southern Swiss Alps, EarthSurf. Process. Landf., 39, 2056\u20132069, doi:10.1002/esp.3599,2014.Scapozza, C., Baron, L., and Lambiel, C.: Borehole Logging inAlpine Periglacial Talus Slopes (Valais, Swiss Alps), PermafrostPeriglacial Process., 26, 67\u201383, doi:10.1002/ppp.1832, 2015.Smith, S. L., Romanovsky, V. E., Lewkowicz, A. G., Burn, C. R.,Allard, M., Clow, G. D., Yoshikawa, K., and Throop, J.: Thermalstate of permafrost in North America: a contribution to the inter-national polar year, Permafrost Periglacial Process., 21, 117\u2013135,doi:10.1002/ppp.690, 2010.Vonder M\u00fchll, D., Hauck, C., and Lehmann, F.: Veri\ufb01ca-tion of geophysical models in Alpine permafrost us-ing borehole information, Ann. Glaciol., 31, 300\u2013306,doi:10.3189/172756400781820057, 2000.Wirz, V., Beutel, J., Gruber, S., Gubler, S., and Purves, R. S.: Esti-mating velocity from noisy GPS data for investigating the tem-poral variability of slope movements, Nat. Hazards Earth Syst.Sci., 14, 2503\u20132520, doi:10.5194/nhess-14-2503-2014, 2014.Zenklusen Mutter, E. and Phillips, M.: Active Layer Charac-teristics At Ten Borehole Sites In Alpine Permafrost Ter-rain, Switzerland, Permafrost Periglacial Process., 23, 138\u2013151,doi:10.1002/ppp.1738, 2012a.Zenklusen Mutter, E. and Phillips, M.: Thermal evidence of recenttalik formation in Ritigraben rock glacier: Swiss Alps, 10th Inter-national Conference on Permafrost, Salekhard, Russia, 479\u2013483,2012b.Zenklusen Mutter, E., Blanchet, J., and Phillips, M.: Analy-sis of ground temperature trends in Alpine permafrost usinggeneralized least squares, J. Geophys. Res., 115, F004009,doi:10.1029/2009JF001648, 2010.www.geogr-helv.net/71/121/2016/ Geogr. Helv., 71, 121\u2013131, 2016 Supplementary resourcesgh-71-121-2016-supplementJune 2016Rachel Luethi\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0Marcia PhillipsDownloadCitations (8)References (44)... Gischig et al., 2011b;Moore et al., 2011). The modeled depth of the thermally active layer matches long-term temperature measurements from a nearby 10-m deep borehole at Eggishorn (Luethi & Phillips, 2016). Our thermal properties and model boundary conditions yield a geothermal gradient of ...... Meanwhile, we assume isotropic thermal properties, even though foliation and geological structure may result in anisotropic behavior. However, despite these simplifications and assumptions, our modeled temperature field matches local observations in a borehole (Luethi & Phillips, 2016), and the pre- dicted amplitudes of seasonal surface displacements fit comfortably within the range of past field measure- ments ( Bakun-Mazor et al., 2013;Gischig et al., 2011b). ...Thermomechanical Stresses Drive Damage of Alpine Valley Rock Walls During Repeat Glacial CyclesArticleFull-text availableSep 2018 Lorenz Gr\u00e4miger Jeffrey R. Moore Simon Loew Valentin GischigCycles of glaciation alter the temperature field in proximal alpine valley flanks, driving rock slope damage through thermomechanical stresses. Here we extend simplified assumptions of glacial debuttressing to quantitatively examine how paraglacial bedrock temperature changes, acting in concert with changing ice loads during Late Pleistocene and Holocene glacial cycles, create damage in adjacent rock slopes and prepare future slope instabilities. When in contact with temperate glacier ice, valley walls maintain near isothermal ~0 \u00b0C surface temperatures and are shielded from daily and annual cycles. With retreat, rock walls are rapidly exposed to strongly varying temperature boundary conditions, a transition we term \u201cparaglacial thermal shock.\u201d Using detailed, conceptual numerical models based on the Aletsch Glacier in Switzerland, we show that including thermomechanical stresses during simulated glacial cycles creates significantly more rock slope damage than predicted for purely mechanical ice loading and unloading. Glacier advances are especially effective in generating damage as rapid cooling drives contraction of the rock mass reducing joint normal stresses. First time exposure to annual temperature cycles during deglaciation induces a shallow damage front that follows the retreating ice margin, generating damage in a complementary process at shorter time scales. Acting on a reduced strength rock mass, modeled thermomechanical cycles enhance the development of a slope instability with similar attributes as observed in our study area. Our results demonstrate that thermomechanical stresses acting in conjunction with changing ice loads are capable of generating considerable rock slope damage with spatial and temporal patterns controlled by glacier extents.ViewShow abstract... According to Holmberg et al. [1997], drift is a temporal shift of sensor response under constant physical and chemical conditions. These conditions are typically induced by water damage to the sensors or water fluxes within the ground, which could affect the interpretation of data to be seen as measurement errors [Luethi and Phillips 2016]. Luethi and Phillips [2016] discussed the challenges and solutions for long-term permafrost borehole temperature monitoring and data interpretation. ...... These conditions are typically induced by water damage to the sensors or water fluxes within the ground, which could affect the interpretation of data to be seen as measurement errors [Luethi and Phillips 2016]. Luethi and Phillips [2016] discussed the challenges and solutions for long-term permafrost borehole temperature monitoring and data interpretation. Utilizing WSN for WQM requires sensors to detect certain parameters in real time, which comes with technology-related limitations known as sensor drift. ...Water Quality Monitoring Using Wireless Sensor Networks: Current Trends and Future Research DirectionsArticleFull-text availableJan 2017ACM T SENSOR NETWORK Kofi Sarpong Adu-Manu Cristiano Tapparello Wendi Heinzelman Jamal-Deen AbdulaiWater is essential for human survival. Although approximately 71% of the world is covered in water, only 2.5% of this is fresh water; hence, fresh water is a valuable resource that must be carefully monitored and maintained. In developing countries, 80% of people are without access to potable water. Cholera is still reported in more than 50 countries. In Africa, 75% of the drinking water comes from underground sources, which makes water monitoring an issue of key concern, aswatermonitoring can be used to trackwater quality changes over time, identify existing or emerging problems, and design effective intervention programs to remedy water pollution. It is important to have detailed knowledge of potable water quality to enable proper treatment and also prevent contamination. In this article, we review methods for water quality monitoring (WQM) from traditional manual methods to more technologically advanced methods employing wireless sensor networks (WSNs) for in situ WQM. In particular, we highlight recent developments in the sensor devices, data acquisition procedures, communication and network architectures, and power management schemes to maintain a long-lived operational WQM system. Finally, we discuss open issues that need to be addressed to further advance automatic WQM using WSNs.ViewShow abstractRecent evolution of damage to infrastructure on permafrost in the French AlpsArticleFull-text availableFeb 2019REG ENVIRON CHANGE Marco Marcer Pierre-Allain Duvillard Philippe Schoeneich Ludovic RavanelThe past four decades have seen extensive development of the winter sport industry in the French Alps and several hundred ropeway transport systems have been installed in areas where mountain permafrost may be present. Due to current climatic change and the ensuing permafrost degradation, the vulnerability of these infrastructures to destabilization may increase. Therefore, there is a real potential for instabilities to develop on ropeway transport systems in the Alps, requiring a better understanding of these processes. This study investigates the relation between permafrost and infrastructure stability in the French Alps, seeking to understand the evolution of this phenomenon over the past decades. This was done by following a two-step analysis. At first, the infrastructure elements built on modeled permafrost-affected areas were inventoried at the scale of the French Alps in order to get an overview of the possible vulnerabilities. Then, our study presents a detailed historical inventory of damage to infrastructure over the past three decades in different geomorphologic contexts. Overall, in the French Alps, there are almost 1000 infrastructure elements located in permafrost areas among which 12 (i.e., 24 infrastructure elements) were identified to have been subject to repeated instances of disruption and deterioration and most of the damages recorded were in areas where permafrost degradation is fully expected (ice-rich terrain). Infrastructure recovery costs may be significantly high, making this issue a relevant consideration to be included in the design process.ViewShow abstractA decade of detailed observations (2008\u20132018) in steep bedrock permafrost at Matterhorn H\u00f6rnligrat (Zermatt, CH)ArticleFull-text availableFeb 2019 Reto Da Forno Samuel Weber Mustafa Yuecel Jan BeutelThe PermaSense project is an ongoing interdisciplinary effort between geo-science and engineering disciplines started in 2006 with the goals to make observations possible that previously have not been possible. Specifically the aims are to obtain measurements data in unprecedented quantity and quality based on technological advances. This paper describes a unique ten+ year data record obtained from in-situ measurements in steep bedrock permafrost in an Alpine environment on the Matterhorn H\u00f6rnligrat, Zermatt Switzerland at 3500 m a.s.l. Through the utilization of state-of-the-art wireless sensor technology it was possible to obtain more data of higher quality, make this data available in near real-time and tightly monitor and control the running experiments. This data set (DOI: https://doi.org/10.1594/PANGAEA.897640, Weber et al., 2019a) constitutes the longest, densest and most diverse data record in the history of mountain permafrost research worldwide with 17 different sensor types used at 29 distinct sensor locations consisting of over 114.5 million data points captured over a period of ten+ years. By documenting and sharing this data in this form we contribute to making our past research reproducible and facilitate future research based on this data e.g. in the area of analysis methodology, comparative studies, assessment of change in the environment, natural hazard warning and the development of process models.ViewShow abstractPermafrost is warming at a global scaleArticleFull-text availableDec 2019 Jeannette Noetzli Boris K Biskaborn Hugues Lantuit Sharon L. SmithPermafrost warming has the potential to amplify global climate change, because when frozen sediments thaw it unlocks soil organic carbon. Yet to date, no globally consistent assessment of permafrost temperature change has been compiled. Here we use a global data set of permafrost temperature time series from the Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost to evaluate temperature change across permafrost regions for the period since the International Polar Year (2007\u20132009). During the reference decade between 2007 and 2016, ground temperature near the depth of zero annual amplitude in the continuous permafrost zone increased by 0.39 \u00b1 0.15 \u00b0C. Over the same period, discontinuous permafrost warmed by 0.20 \u00b1 0.10 \u00b0C. Permafrost in mountains warmed by 0.19 \u00b1 0.05 \u00b0C and in Antarctica by 0.37 \u00b1 0.10 \u00b0C. Globally, permafrost temperature increased by 0.29 \u00b1 0.12 \u00b0C. The observed trend follows the Arctic amplification of air temperature increase in the Northern Hemisphere. In the discontinuous zone, however, ground warming occurred due to increased snow thickness while air temperature remained statistically unchanged.ViewShow abstractRecent evolution of an ice-cored moraine at the Gentianes Pass, Valais Alps, SwitzerlandArticleJul 2018LAND DEGRAD DEV Pierre-Allain Duvillard Ludovic Ravanel Christophe Lambiel Michel JaboyedoffLateral moraines located in permafrost environments are susceptible to preserve large amount of both glacier and periglacial ice. To understand how ice\u2010cored moraines located in high alpine environments evolve in a context of both glacier retreat and permafrost degradation, we performed, 11 terrestrial laser\u2010scanning measurement campaigns between 2007 and 2014 on a highly anthropogenic overprinted moraine prone to instability. Resulting comparison of the subsequent 3D models allowed to qualitatively and quantitatively analyze the morphological evolution of the moraine. The comparisons indicate a very high geomorphic activity of the moraine including large areas affected by downslope movements of blocks and 10 landslides with a volume between 24 \u00b1 1 and 1138 \u00b1 47 m\u00b3. Data also indicated a very strong ice melt with a loss of ice thickness locally reaching 17.7 m at the foot of the moraine. These results, compared with resistivity and thermal measurements of the ground, suggest the combined role of ice loss at the foot of the moraine and the permafrost activity/warming in triggering these processes.ViewShow abstractInstrumentation thermique et cin\u00e9matique des parois \u00e0 permafrost du massif du Mont Blanc.BookFull-text availableJan 2017 Pierre-Allain Duvillard Emmanuel Malet Stephan Gruber Ludovic RavanelUnlike the superficial deposits in which the presence of permafrost is indicated by geomorphological evidences, its occurrence in the rock walls can only be suggested by the existence of perennial ice sheets or hanging glaciers. Everywhere else, only indirect (geophysics) or direct temperature measurements make it possible to verify its presence. In these rock walls, permafrost and its degradation due to global warming are at the origin of rock falls and rock avalanches with a devastating power. In order to know the state and the thermal evolution of the rock walls, to parameterize or validate the permafrost distribution models, or to survey the kinematics of the fractures in the bedrock, it is necessary to monitor these rock walls. This article presents the methods of instrumentation and the equipment used for more than 10 years in the Mont Blanc massif as well as the associated research questions.ViewShow abstractNew insights on permafrost genesis and conservation in talus slopes based on observations at Fl\u00fcelapass, Eastern SwitzerlandArticleApr 2017GEOMORPHOLOGY Manfred Buchroithner Robert Kenner Christian Hauck Marcia PhillipsThe talus slope at Fl\u00fcelapass was the first mountain permafrost study site in Switzerland in the 1970s and the presence of ice-rich permafrost at the foot of the slope has been investigated in the context of several studies focusing on the role of snow cover distribution. We review previously developed hypotheses and present new ones using various data sources, such as temperature measurements in boreholes, a subaquatic DEM generated from unmanned aerial system (UAS) photogrammetry, terrestrial laser scan measurements of snow depth, geophysical ground investigations and automatic time-lapse photography. From this combination of data sources together with observations in the field, an interesting sequence of geomorphologic processes is established at Fl\u00fcelapass. As a result we show how mass wasting processes can initiate the genesis and long-term conservation of ice-rich permafrost at the base of a talus slope.ViewShow abstractThermal characteristics of permafrost in the steep alpine rock walls of the Aiguille du Midi (Mont Blanc Massif, 3842 m a.s.l)ArticleFull-text availableJan 2015TCD Florence Magnin Paolo Pogliotti Ludovic Ravanel Philip DelinePermafrost and related thermo-hydro-mechanical processes are thought to influence high alpine rock wall stability, but a lack of field measurements means that the characteristics and processes of rock wall permafrost are poorly understood. To help remedy this situation, in 2005 work began to install a monitoring system at the Aiguille du Midi (3842 m a.s.l). This paper presents temperature records from nine surface sensors (eight years of records) and three 10 m deep boreholes (4 years of records), installed at locations with different surface and bedrock characteristics. In line with previous studies, our temperature data analyses showed that: micro-meteorology controls the surface temperature, active layer thicknesses are directly related to aspect and ranged fromViewShow abstractModelling Transient Ground Surface Temperatures of Past Rockfall Events: Towards a Better Understanding of Failure Mechanisms in Changing Periglacial EnvironmentsArticleFull-text availableOct 2015GEOGR ANN A Rachel Luethi Stephan Gruber Ludovic RavanelDespite the rising interest in mountain permafrost due to climatic changes and a noticed increase of registered rockfall events in the European Alps and other mountain ranges, little is known about transient thermal conditions in the detachment areas of rockfalls. Temperature conditions prior to the rockfall events of 144 past events in the European Alps were modelled with a physically based ground temperature model. To minimise the impact that uncertainty has on interpretations, only relative values were used, that is, percentiles obtained from cumulative distribution functions of the modelled ground surface temperatures from the beginning of the meteorological measurement series up to the event dates. Our results suggest that small and mid-sized rockfalls (volumes up to 100 000 m3) from high elevation occurred mainly during short-term periods of unusually high temperatures. This was neither found to be a result of the seasonal distribution (most analysed events in higher elevations occurred from July to September) nor of the longer-term temporal distribution (most analysed events occurred after 2000) only. Plausible explanations are either a destabilisation related to advective thaw or failure due to stress redistribution caused by large temperature variations. Large deep-seated rock slope failures (\u2265100 000 m3) in high elevation occurred all year round.ViewShow abstractSnow as a driving factor of rock surface temperatures in steep rough rock wallsArticleOct 2015COLD REG SCI TECHNOL Anna Haberkorn Robert Kenner Martin Hoelzle Marcia PhillipsObservations show that considerable amounts of snow can accumulate in steep, rough rock walls. The heterogeneously distributed snow cover significantly affects the surface energy balance and hence the thermal regime of the rock walls.To assess the small-scale variability of snow depth and rock temperatures in steep north and south facing rock walls, a spatially distributed multi-method approach is applied at Gemsstock, Switzerland, combining 35 continuous near-surface rock temperature measurements, high resolution snow depth observations using terrestrial laser scanning, as well as in-situ snow pit investigations.The thermal regime of the rock surface is highly dependent on short- and longwave radiation, albedo, surface roughness, snow depth and on snow distribution in time and space. Around 2. m of snow can accumulate on slopes with angles up to 75\u00b0, due to micro-topographic structures like ledges. Hence, contrasts in mean annual rock surface temperature between the north and the south facing slopes are less than 4. \u00b0C. However, significant small-scale variability of up to 10. \u00b0C in mean daily rock surface temperature occurs within a few metres over the rock walls due to the variable snow distribution, revealing the heterogeneity and complexity of the thermal regime at a very local scale. In addition, multiple linear regression could explain up to 77% of near-surface rock temperature variability, which underlines the importance of radiation and snow depth and thus also of the topography.In the rock faces the thermal insulation of the ground starts with snow depths exceeding 0.2. m. This is due to the high thermal resistance of a less densely packed snow cover, especially in the north facing slope. Additionally, aspect induced differences of snow cover characteristics and consequently thermal conductivities are observed in the rock walls.ViewShow abstractOverview of rock glacier kinematics research in the Swiss AlpsArticleFull-text availableJan 2010 Isabelle G\u00e4rtner-Roer Reynald Delaloye Christophe LambielOverview of rock glacier kinematics research in the Swiss Alps: seasonal rhythm, interannual variations and trends over several decades Delaloye, R; Lambiel, C; G\u00e4rtner-Roer, I Delaloye, R; Lambiel, C; G\u00e4rtner-Roer, I (2010). Overview of rock glacier kinematics research in the Swiss Alps: seasonal rhythm, interannual variations and trends over several decades. Geographica Helvetica, 65(2):135-145.ViewShow abstractThermal Regime of Rock and its Relation to Snow Cover in Steep Alpine Rock Walls: Gemsstock, Central Swiss AlpsArticleMar 2015Geogr Ann Phys Geogr Anna Haberkorn Robert Kenner Martin Hoelzle Marcia PhillipsSnow cover influences the thermal regime and stability of frozen rock walls. In this study, we investigate and model the impact of the spatially variable snow cover on the thermal regime of steep permafrost rock walls. This is necessary for a more detailed understanding of the thermal and mechanical processes causing changes in rock temperature and in the ice and water contents of frozen rock, which possibly lead to rock wall instability. To assess the temporal and spatial evolution and influence of the snow, detailed measurements have been carried out at two selected points in steep north- and south-facing rock walls since 2012. In parallel, the one-dimensional energy balance model SNOWPACK is used to simulate the effects of snow cover on the thermal regime of the rock walls. For this, a multi-method approach with high temporal resolution is applied, combining meteorological, borehole rock temperature and terrain parameter measurements. To validate the results obtained for the ground thermal regime and the seasonally varying snowpack, the model output is compared with near-surface rock temperature measurements and remote snow cover observations.No decrease of snow depth at slope angles up to 70\u00b0 was observed in rough terrain due to micro-topographic structures. Strong contrasts in rock temperatures between north- and south-facing slopes are due to differences in solar radiation, slope angle and the timing and depth of the snow cover.SNOWPACK proved to be useful for modelling snow cover\u2013rock interactions in smooth, homogenous rock slopes.ViewShow abstractActive Layer Characteristics At Ten Borehole Sites In Alpine Permafrost Terrain, SwitzerlandArticleApr 2012 Evelyn Zenklusen Mutter Marcia PhillipsThis study investigates and compares active layer characteristics determined from ground temperature measurements at ten borehole sites in various types of Alpine permafrost terrain. Active layer thickness (ALT) remained fairly constant at the individual boreholes over the past five to 14 years, but was highly variable among the sites due to local terrain characteristics. To allow intra-site comparisons, a characteristic depth within the active layer was determined for each site. The temperature series either measured or interpolated for that depth were used to investigate different thermal stages during the annual thawing and refreezing cycle. The relation between air temperature thawing-degree days and ALT was investigated on an annual, seasonal and daily basis. The results show that at least daily data are required to establish the relevant characteristics of active layer development. Periods of slow advance of the thaw plane, interpreted as being due to the presence of ice-bearing layers within the active layer, are particularly important to the final ALT. Rapid active layer deepening, however, can occur due to the formation of taliks caused by lateral thermal disturbances below the active layer. Copyright \u00a9 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.ViewShow abstractAssessing the rock glacier kinematics on three different time scales: a case study from the Southern Swiss AlpsArticleDec 2014 Claudio Bozzini Cristian Scapozza Marco Conedera Christophe LambielSurface temperature increases since the 1990s have often been associated with an increase in the speed of rock glaciers. Evidence of similar links on the centennial to millennial scale are, however, still lacking due to less focus to date on the medium- and long-term kinematics of these landforms. In order to assess (palaeo)climatic variations in rock glacier kinematics, we analysed the movements of the Stabbio di Largario rock glacier in the Southern Swiss Alps using three different time scales. The Schmidt hammer exposure-age dating (SHD) was applied to study long-term kinematics in order to extrapolate the minimal age of the formation of the rock glacier, which may have started its development after the Mid-Holocene climate optimum, and to detect possible accelerations of the horizontal surface velocity during the Medieval Warm Period. Georeferentiation and orthorectification of six historical photographs of the rock glacier taken between ad 1910 and today were analysed using monoplotting to detect the rock glacier displacement on the decennial scale from the end of the Little Ice Age. Finally, differential GPS monitoring data available since ad 2009 were used to assess annual and seasonal creep rates of the rock glacier at present. Our results show a link between the periods of increase in mean air temperature on different time scales and variations in rock glacier kinematics and provide important new insights into rock glacier development and evolution on the long-term scale. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.ViewShow abstractModellierung und Messung von Permafrosttemperaturen im Gipfelgrat der Zugspitze, DeutschlandArticleFull-text availableJan 2010Geograph Helv Jeannette Noetzli Stephan Gruber von Poschinger AndreasIm Gebiet der Zugspitze, dem mit 2962 m \u00fc.M. h\u00f6chsten Berg Deutschlands, sind auch die bedeutendsten Permafrostvorkommen des Landes zu finden. Der Felsgrat der Zugspitze ist steil und stark bebaut. Schon w\u00e4hrend der Bauarbeiten in den 1960er Jahren wurden massives Eis in Kl\u00fcften und gefrorene Lockersedimente entdeckt. Allf\u00e4llige Stabilit\u00e4tsprobleme durch Permafrostdegradation k\u00f6nnen entscheidende Konsequenzen auf Bauwerke haben. Deshalb wurde im August 2007 f\u00fcr langfristige Permafrostbeobachtung eine Bohrung quer durch den Gipfelgrat gemacht und mit einer Thermistorenkette ausgestattet. In einer Vorstudie wurden die Temperaturverh\u00e4ltnisse mit Computermodellen simuliert. Resultate zeigen Permafrost mit Temperaturen bis etwa -3 \u00b0C in der Nordseite und in Teilen der S\u00fcdseite. Die Permafrostgrenze verl\u00e4uft im Inneren des Grates und ist im oberen Bereich fast senkrecht. Die nach der Realisierung der Bohrung gemessenen Temperaturen sind etwas niedriger als im Modell, stimmen aber im Allgemeinen gut mit den Ergebnissen der Simulation \u00fcberein, insbesondere wenn auch transiente Effekte und der Einfluss latenter W\u00e4rme ber\u00fccksichtigt werden. Monitoring und Modellstudien des Permafrosts in der Zugspitze werden im Rahmen von internationalen Projekten weitergef\u00fchrt und ausgebaut. Schl\u00fcsselw\u00f6rter: Felspermafrost, dreidimensionale Modellierung, Bohrlochtemperaturen, ZugspitzeViewShow abstractWhy permafrost rocks become unstable: A rock-ice-mechanical model in time and spaceArticleJun 2013 Friederike K. G\u00fcnzel Daniel Funk Michael KrautblatterIn this paper, we develop a mechanical model that relates the destabilization of thawing permafrost rock slopes to temperature-related effects on both, rock- and ice-mechanics; and laboratory testing of key assumptions is performed. Degrading permafrost is considered to be an important factor for rock\u2013slope failures in alpine and arctic environments, but the mechanics are poorly understood. The destabilization is commonly attributed to changes in ice-mechanical properties while bedrock friction and fracture propagation have not been considered yet. However, fracture toughness, compressive and tensile strength decrease by up to 50% and more when intact water-saturated rock thaws. Based on literature and experiments, we develop a modified Mohr\u2013Coulomb failure criterion for ice-filled rock fractures that incorporates fracturing of rock bridges, friction of rough fracture surfaces, ductile creep of ice and detachment mechanisms along rock\u2013ice interfaces. Novel laboratory setups were developed to assess the temperature dependency of the friction of ice-free rock\u2013rock interfaces and the shear detachment of rock\u2013ice interfaces. In degrading permafrost, rock-mechanical properties may control early stages of destabilization and become more important for higher normal stress, i.e. higher magnitudes of rock\u2013slope failure. Ice-mechanical properties outbalance the importance of rock-mechanical components after the deformation accelerates and are more relevant for smaller magnitudes. The model explains why all magnitudes of rock\u2013slope failures can be prepared and triggered by permafrost degradation and is capable of conditioning long para-glacial response times. Here, we present a synoptic rock- and ice-mechanical model that explains the mechanical destabilization processes operating in warming permafrost rocks.ViewShow abstractInstability of a High Alpine Rock Ridge: The Lower Ar\u00eate Des Cosmiques, Mont Blanc Massif, FranceArticleApr 2012GEOGR ANN A Christian Vincent Ludovic Ravanel Christophe Lambiel Philip DelineRockfalls are dominant in the rock slopes and rock ridge morphodynamics in high mountain areas and endanger people who pass along or stay there, as well as infrastructure that host them (cable cars, refuges). Risks are probably greater now because of fast permafrost degradation and regression of surface ice, two consequences of the atmospheric warming of the last decades. These two commonly associated factors are involved in the instability of rock slopes by modifying the mechanical behaviour of often ice-filled rock fractures and the mechanical constraints in the rock masses. This paper examines over 15 years the instability of the lower Ar\u00eate des Cosmiques on the French side of the Mont Blanc massif. Its vulnerability is due to the presence of a high-capacity refuge on its top (3613m a.s.l.). In 1998, a part of the refuge was left without support when a collapse of 600m3 occurred immediately below it. Since this date, reinforcement work has been carried out in this area, but the whole ridge has been affected by around 15 relatively shallow rockfalls. Through a multidisciplinary approach, this article assesses the role of the cryospheric factors in the triggering of these rockfalls.ViewShow abstractShow moreAdJoin ResearchGate to find the people and research you need to help your work.15+ million members118+ million publications700k+ research projectsJoin for freeRecommendationsDiscover more publications, questions and projects in PermafrostProjectParaglacial, periglacial rock slope stability Andrew Kos Florian Amann Marcia PhillipsRole of rapid glacier retreat on rock slope stability View projectProjectInfluence of snow cover on thermal and mechanic processes in steep permafrost rockwalls (2011 - 2015) Daniel Draebing Michael Krautblatter Marcia Phillips[...] Robert KennerThe project\u2019s aim was the investigation of the impact of the snow cover on thermal dynamics and mechanical responses in steep permafrost rockwalls. Given that 90 % or more of all permafrost rock wa lls inherit significant snow accumulations and that snow cover and meltwater exert a massive influence on thermal and mechanical behaviour, the understanding of snow control in steep permafrost rocks is among the major challenges in cryosphere research. We targeted at developing 1) process understanding for thermal and mechanical snow impact quantification, 2) a modelling framework for a coupled understanding of thermal and mechanical snow interaction and 3) a future understanding for estimating the impact of snow cover scenarios in steep permafrost rock walls. The ISPR\u2010project seeks to understand the influence of snow cover on the thermal and mechanical regime in steep permafrost rockwalls. The investigation of the external forcing (Part 2) was the main focus of the Swiss project partners, while the German project partners (Part 1) concentrated on the internal mechanical, thermal and systemic response of the rockwalls. German Team: Michael Krautblatter (Lead), Richard Dikau, Daniel Draebing (PhD student) Swiss Team: Marcia Phillips (Lead), Martin Hoelzle, Anna Haberkorn (PhD student), Robert Kenner Publications: Part 1 and 2: Thermal and Mechanical Responses Resulting From Spatial and Temporal Snow Cover Variability in Permafrost Rock Slopes, Steintaelli, Swiss Alps (PPP) http://bit.ly/2rYlbcM Seasonally intermittent water flow through deep fractures in an Alpine Rock Ridge: Gemsstock, Central Swiss Alps (CRST) http://bit.ly/2t2qFCY Part 1 (German Team): Thermo-cryogenic controls of fracture kinematics in permafrost rockwalls (GRL) http://bit.ly/2s2EpJb Application of refraction seismics in alpine permafrost studies: A review (ESR) http://bit.ly/2sxMtoZ Interaction of thermal and mechanical processes in steep permafrost rock walls: A conceptual approach (Geomorphology) http://bit.ly/2sY2Uvp Pseudo 3D - P-wave refraction seismic monitoring of permafrost in steep unstable bedrock (JGR) http://bit.ly/2sXQ2Wa P-wave velocity changes in freezing hard low-porosity rocks: A laboratory-based time-average model (Cryosphere) http://bit.ly/2s2pVsV Part 2 (Swiss Team): Snowpack characteristics on steep frozen rock slopes (CRST) http://bit.ly/2rYEDpB Distributed snow and rock temperature modelling in steep rock walls using Alpine3D (Cryosphere) http://bit.ly/2t24Va5 Snow as a driving factor of rock surface temperatures in steep rough rock walls (CRST) http://bit.ly/2s2Cc0j Thermal Regime of Rock and its Relation to Snow Cover in Steep Alpine Rock Walls: Gemsstock, Central Swiss Alps (Geogr Ann) http://bit.ly/2tVBvHv ... [more]View projectProjectPERMOS Jeannette Noetzli Marcia Phillips Reynald Delaloye[...] Robert KennerThe Swiss Permafrost Monitoring Network (PERMOS) systematically documents the state and changes of mountain permafrost in the Swiss Alps based on long-term terrestrial measurements. View projectProjectSloMove C. Iasio Gabriele Amato G. Fubelli[...] Andreas Paul ZischgSloMove studies the opportunities offered by SAR remote sensing systems to monitor soil deformation. Monitoring soil deformation is part of the ordinary activities carried out by public and private bodies responsible for risk management and land protection. The methodology used covers all stages, from the gathering of data to the update of natural threats prevention instruments. After refining and sharing the most recent technologies, the partners choose the areas (both in Italy and Switzerland) to be tested for the integration of satellite and terrestrial monitoring systems on soil deformation. Updates on risk management criteria, techniques and procedures will be given through technical workshops and guidelines aimed at people responsible for safeguarding the area. ... [more]View projectArticleEstimating Non-Conductive Heat Flow Leading to Intra-Permafrost Talik Formation at the Ritigraben Ro...June 2016 \u00b7 Permafrost and Periglacial Processes Rachel Luethi Marcia Phillips Michael LehningAlthough non-conductive heat flow plays an important role in the evolution of rock glacier temperature and dynamics, few studies have quantified it. At the Ritigraben rock glacier (Switzerland), intra-permafrost talik formation was observed at around 12m depth and related to snowmelt and rainfall infiltration. Our aim is to attribute the talik formation to physical processes by quantifying the ... [Show full abstract] heat required to explain the observed dynamics of the temperature profile. We combined measured borehole temperatures, meteorological data and borehole logs with physics-based modelling experiments using the one-dimensional SNOWPACK model. The simulations were run with a simulated heat sink/source controlled by modelled snow cover, measured meteorological data and borehole temperature measurements. This allowed us to estimate non-conductive heat flow for different synthetic ground profiles with varying physical properties based on borehole logs. Our model results corroborate the assumption that purely conductive heat exchange is incompatible with the observed talik formation. We attribute the talik to advective and conductive heating by infiltrating water (which causes local heating rates to the order of 1Wm-3) and circulating air (which causes cooling to the order of 0.1Wm-3).Read moreArticleFull-text availableDistinguishing ice-rich and ice-poor permafrost to map ground temperatures and -ice content in the S...January 2019 \u00b7 The Cryosphere Discussions Jeannette Noetzli Robert Kenner Martin Hoelzle[...] Marcia PhillipsA new countrywide permafrost distribution map of Switzerland is presented, indicating ground temperatures and ice content. The new representation of ground temperatures is achieved by distinguishing ice-poor and ice-rich permafrost in the modelling process. There is a very significant correlation of ground temperatures with elevation and potential incoming solar radiation in ice-poor and ice-free ... [Show full abstract] ground. The distribution of ice-rich permafrost was defined by modelling mass wasting processes and the integration of snow and ice into the ground caused by them. This dual approach allowed a clear improvement in the cartographic representation of permafrost-free elevational belts which are bordered above and below by permafrost. The reproduction of such commonly occurring permafrost gaps allowed a higher mapping accuracy and unambiguity of the mapping zones. Permafrost occurrence is represented by two clearly defined classes: Zone 1 representing modelled ground temperatures and zone 2 indicating excess ground ice outside of zone 1. 58% of 92 validation sites could be definitively classified as having permafrost or no permafrost. If only ice-poor or \u2013free ground is considered, this value reaches 90%. The rather simple dependency of ice-poor permafrost on two main parameters is not only relevant for mapping but also for a wide range of scientific and engineering purposes.View full-textArticleRock slope failure in a recently deglaciated permafrost rock wall at Piz Kesch (Eastern Swiss Alps),...July 2016 \u00b7 Earth Surface Processes and Landforms Rachel LuethiAndrea Wolter Yves B\u00fchler[...] Marcia PhillipsIn February 2014, a rock pillar with a volume of around 150 000 m3 collapsed at Piz Kesch in the Eastern Swiss Alps. A reconstruction of the conditions prior to the event and of the event itself is presented on the basis of different sources of data. The methods applied include photogrammetry, terrestrial laser scanning, structural geological analysis, examination of meteorological data, ... [Show full abstract] carbon-14 (14C) dating of organic material in permafrost ice from a tension crack and numerical modelling of likely modes of failure. Despite a complete lack of in situ measurements in the rock wall prior to the event and of direct observations during the event, the available data allow the determination of the approximate timing of the event as well as the structural predisposition, the probable mode of failure and the timescale of several millennia involved in the triggering of the failure of the rock pillar. The interdisciplinary analysis of this event contributes towards understanding the complex interaction of processes involved in large rock slope failures currently occurring in warming mountain permafrost regions. CopyrightRead moreArticleFull-text availableModelling Transient Ground Surface Temperatures of Past Rockfall Events: Towards a Better Understand...October 2015 \u00b7 Geografiska Annaler Series A Physical Geography Rachel Luethi Stephan Gruber Ludovic RavanelDespite the rising interest in mountain permafrost due to climatic changes and a noticed increase of registered rockfall events in the European Alps and other mountain ranges, little is known about transient thermal conditions in the detachment areas of rockfalls. Temperature conditions prior to the rockfall events of 144 past events in the European Alps were modelled with a physically based ... [Show full abstract] ground temperature model. To minimise the impact that uncertainty has on interpretations, only relative values were used, that is, percentiles obtained from cumulative distribution functions of the modelled ground surface temperatures from the beginning of the meteorological measurement series up to the event dates. Our results suggest that small and mid-sized rockfalls (volumes up to 100 000 m3) from high elevation occurred mainly during short-term periods of unusually high temperatures. This was neither found to be a result of the seasonal distribution (most analysed events in higher elevations occurred from July to September) nor of the longer-term temporal distribution (most analysed events occurred after 2000) only. Plausible explanations are either a destabilisation related to advective thaw or failure due to stress redistribution caused by large temperature variations. Large deep-seated rock slope failures (\u2265100 000 m3) in high elevation occurred all year round.View full-textDiscover moreDownload citationWhat type of file do you want? RIS BibTeX Plain TextWhat do you want to download? Citation only Citation and abstractDownloadInterested in research on Permafrost?Join ResearchGate to discover and stay up-to-date with the latest research from leading experts in Permafrost and many other scientific topics.Join for freeorDiscover by subject areaRecruit researchersJoin for freeLoginEmail Tip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inor log in withWelcome back! Please log in.Email \u00b7 HintTip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inor log in withNo account? Sign upAboutNewsCompanyCareersSupportHelp centerFAQBusiness solutionsRecruitingAdvertisingAd\u00a9 ResearchGate 2019. All rights reserved.ImprintTermsPrivacy", "(PDF) Permafrost is warming at a global scale We use cookies to make interactions with our website easy and meaningful, to better understand the use of our services, and to tailor advertising. For further information, including about cookie settings, please read our Cookie Policy . By continuing to use this site, you consent to the use of cookies.Got ittopSee all \u203a5 CitationsSee all \u203a51 ReferencesDownload citationShare Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Google+ RedditDownload full-text PDFPermafrost is warming at a global scaleArticle (PDF Available)\u2002in\u2002Nature Communications 10(1)\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0December 2019\u2002with\u2002646 ReadsDOI: 10.1038/s41467-018-08240-4 Cite this publication Boris K Biskaborn24.23Alfred Wegener Institute Helmholtz Centre for Polar and Marine Research Sharon L. Smith+ 44 Jeannette Noetzli26.3WSL Institute for Snow and Avalanche Research SLF Heidrun Matthes22.74Alfred Wegener Institute Helmholtz Centre for Polar and Marine ResearchShow more authorsHideAbstractPermafrost warming has the potential to amplify global climate change, because when frozen sediments thaw it unlocks soil organic carbon. Yet to date, no globally consistent assessment of permafrost temperature change has been compiled. Here we use a global data set of permafrost temperature time series from the Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost to evaluate temperature change across permafrost regions for the period since the International Polar Year (2007\u20132009). During the reference decade between 2007 and 2016, ground temperature near the depth of zero annual amplitude in the continuous permafrost zone increased by 0.39 \u00b1 0.15 \u00b0C. Over the same period, discontinuous permafrost warmed by 0.20 \u00b1 0.10 \u00b0C. Permafrost in mountains warmed by 0.19 \u00b1 0.05 \u00b0C and in Antarctica by 0.37 \u00b1 0.10 \u00b0C. Globally, permafrost temperature increased by 0.29 \u00b1 0.12 \u00b0C. The observed trend follows the Arctic amplification of air temperature increase in the Northern Hemisphere. In the discontinuous zone, however, ground warming occurred due to increased snow thickness while air temperature remained statistically unchanged.Discover the world's research15+ million members118+ million publications700k+ research projectsJoin for free Content uploaded by Hugues LantuitAuthor contentAll content in this area was uploaded by Hugues Lantuit on Jan 17, 2019 Download full-text PDF ARTICLEPermafrost is warming at a global scaleBoris K. Biskaborn et al.#Permafrost warming has the potential to amplify global climate change, because when frozensediments thaw it unlocks soil organic carbon. Yet to date, no globally consistent assessmentof permafrost temperature change has been compiled. Here we use a global data set ofpermafrost temperature time series from the Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost toevaluate temperature change across permafrost regions for the period since the InternationalPolar Year (2007\u20132009). During the reference decade between 2007 and 2016, groundtemperature near the depth of zero annual amplitude in the continuous permafrost zoneincreased by 0.39 \u00b1 0.15 \u00b0C. Over the same period, discontinuous permafrost warmed by0.20 \u00b1 0.10 \u00b0C. Permafrost in mountains warmed by 0.19 \u00b1 0.05 \u00b0C and in Antarctica by 0.37\u00b1 0.10 \u00b0C. Globally, permafrost temperature increased by 0.29 \u00b1 0.12 \u00b0C. The observed trendfollows the Arctic ampli\ufb01cation of air temperature increase in the Northern Hemisphere. Inthe discontinuous zone, however, ground warming occurred due to increased snow thicknesswhile air temperature remained statistically unchanged.https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-4 OPEN. Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to B.K.B. (email: boris.biskaborn@awi.de).#A full list of authors and their af\ufb01liationsappears at the end of the paper.NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:264 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08 240-4| www.nature.com/naturecommunications 11234567890():,; One quarter of the Northern Hemisphere and 17% of theEarth\u2019s exposed land surface is underlain by permafrost1,that is ground with a temperature remaining at or below0 \u00b0C for at least two consecutive years. The thermal state ofpermafrost is sensitive to changing climatic conditions andin particular to rising air temperatures and changing snowregimes2\u20137. This is important, because over the past few decades,the atmosphere in polar and high elevation regions has warmedfaster than elsewhere8. Even if global air temperature increased byno more than 2 \u00b0C by 2100, permafrost may still degrade over asigni\ufb01cant area9. Such a change would have serious consequencesfor ecosystems, hydrological systems, and infrastructure integ-rity10\u201312. Carbon release resulting from permafrost degradationwill potentially impact the Earth\u2019s climate system because largeamounts of carbon previously locked in frozen organic matterwill decompose into carbon dioxide and methane13\u201315. Thisprocess is expected to augment global warming by 0.13\u20130.27 \u00b0Cby 2100 and by up to 0.42 \u00b0C by 230015. Despite this, permafrostchange is not yet adequately represented in most of the EarthSystem Models14 that are used for the IPCC projections fordecision makers. One major reason for this was the absence of astandardized global data set of permafrost temperature observa-tions for model validation.Prior to the International Polar Year (IPY, 2007\u20132009), groundtemperatures were measured in boreholes scattered across per-mafrost regions. However, a globally organized permafrost datanetwork and a standard reference period against which tem-perature change could be measured did not exist. One key out-come of the IPY was strenghtening the Global TerrestrialNetwork for Permafrost (GTN-P)16,4. This initiative established atemperature reference baseline for permafrost and led to anincrease in the number of accessible boreholes used for tem-perature monitoring.To analyze the thermal change of permafrost we assembled aglobal permafrost-temperature data set that includes time seriesof data attributed to the IPY reference boreholes. We compiled atime series for the decade from 2007 to 2016 that comprises meanannual ground temperatures\ue001T, determined from temperaturesmeasured in boreholes within the continuous and discontinuouspermafrost zones in the Arctic (including the Subarctic), Ant-arctica and at high elevations outside the polar regions. Themeasurements were made at, or as close as possible to the depthof zero annual amplitude Z*, where seasonal changes in groundtemperature are negligible (\u22640.1 \u00b0C). Rates of permafrost tem-perature change calculated for the 2007\u20132016 decade wereindexed in each borehole to suppress near-surface and deepgeothermal changes. Regional and global change rates were cal-culated as area-weighted means. To compare single borehole sites,due to the higher availability of full-year records after 2007, weranked the temperature difference between the biennial means of2008\u20132009 and 2015\u20132016. We used linear regression on\ue001Tbetween 2007\u20132016 to estimate decadal change rates. To calculateannual departures, we compared consecutive years to the refer-ence mean of 2008\u20132009. We concluded, that ground tempera-ture near the depth of zero annual amplitude increased in allpermafrost zones on Earth, that is continuous and discontinuouspermafrost in the Northern Hemisphere, as well as permafrost inthe mountains and in Antarctica. The observed trend followedincreased air temperature and snow thickness, each in varyingdegrees depending on the region.ResultsPermafrost temperature changes. Measurements from boreholesites established prior to the IPY generally indicated warmingdriven by higher air temperatures (Fig. 1)4,17,18. Our new data setcontains 154 boreholes of which 123 allow calculation of decadaltemperature change rates based on adequate time series. Theremaining 31 boreholes provide additional information on annualdepartures. Our results show that in the decade after the IPYpermafrost warmed within 71 boreholes, cooled in 12, andremained unchanged (within measurement accuracy) in theremaining 40 (Fig. 2). The ground temperature rose above 0 \u00b0C in\ufb01ve boreholes, indicating thawing at the measurement depth of10 m at Z*. The largest increase of\ue001Tover the observed referencedecade between 2007 and 2016 was 0.39 \u00b1 0.15 \u00b0C dec\ue0011Ref in theArctic continuous permafrost zone. The greatest permafrosttemperature changes observed in individual boreholes (\u0394\ue001Tb) since2008\u20132009 were 0.93 and 0.90 \u00b0C in northwestern Siberia (MarreSale, 10 m) and northeastern Siberia (Samoylov Island, 20.75 m),respectively. The discontinuous permafrost zone experiencedwarming of 0.20 \u00b1 0.10 \u00b0C dec\ue0011Ref . The largest \u0394\ue001Tbsince2008\u20132009 of 0.95 \u00b0C was observed in southeastern Siberia,Magadan (Olsky pass, 10 m). Permafrost at this site startedthawing after the IPY period at the measurement depth.Mountain permafrost in the data set is mainly represented byboreholes in the European Alps, the Nordic countries, and centralAsia. Although absolute\ue001Tvalues in mountain permafrost arehighly heterogeneous, depending on elevation, local topography,snow regime, and subsurface characteristics, changes in mountainpermafrost temperatures were analyzed for all regions andsettings19 as one group. They can vary considerably, however,between sites of low and high ground ice content at temperaturesjust below 0 \u00b0C.5579386265 7105285018548714313561113 1710287117102831abMean annual permafrost temperature (\u00b0C)\u201315\u201310\u2013501980 1986 1992 1998 2004 2010 2016265854287431 87183155528710 79 38617101025011171113356Fig. 1 Long permafrost temperature records for selected sites. aLocation ofboreholes with long time-series data. Because some regions lack longtemperature records, shorter temperature records from Greenland andChinese mountains are included for comparison. Depth of measurements isaccording to the Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost ID16: 24.4 m (ID356), 20 m (ID 55, 79, 102, 117, 501, 710, 831, 1113, and 1710), 18 m (ID 386),16.75 m (ID 871), 15 m (ID 854), 12 m (ID 287), 10 m (ID 265, 431), and 5 m(ID 528). The light blue area represents the continuous permafrost zone(>90% coverage) and the light purple area represents the discontinuouspermafrost zones (<90% coverage). bMean annual ground temperatureover time. Colors indicate the location of the boreholes in a. Permafrostzones are derived from the International Permafrost Association (IPA)map46. World Borders data are derived from http://thematicmapping.org/downloads/world_borders.php and licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/)ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-42NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:264 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08 240-4| www.nature.com/naturecommunications Mountain permafrost\ue001Tincreased20,21 by 0.19 \u00b1 0.05 \u00b0C dec\ue0011Ref .The greatest \u0394\ue001Tbsince 2008\u20132009 was 1.15 \u00b0C, observed in theAldan mountain tundra of southern Yakutia, Siberia (Taezhnoe,25 m).On average, permafrost across zones warmed by 0.33 \u00b1 0.16 \u00b0Cover the reference decade in northern Asia and by 0.23 \u00b10.11 \u00b0C dec\ue0011Ref in North America. This difference is most likelydue to stronger warming of the atmosphere over North Asiacompared to North America, as indicated by reconstructeddecadal air temperature changes (1998\u20132012) that showedcooling in Alaska22.Similar to warming of the Arctic continuous permafrost zone,the Antarctic permafrost warmed by 0.37 \u00b1 0.10 \u00b0C dec\ue0011Ref . How-ever, the remoteness of the continent and its limited accessibilityresulted in far fewer boreholes drilled to Z*compared to theNorthern Hemisphere. Consequently, permafrost temperaturedepartures and trends were statistically not signi\ufb01cant and hadlarge uncertainty bands (Fig. 3d).Air temperature changes. The relation between air and soiltemperature development in permafrost regions is not straightfor-ward due to highly variable buffer layers such as vegetation, activelayer soils, or snow cover. To compare permafrost temperaturechanges to those in the atmosphere, we applied the same calculationmethod for each borehole site using mean annual air temperatures(^T) at 2-m height above ground level (Fig. 4a, d), spatially inter-polated from the ERA Interim gridded reanalysis data set23.Wecalculated general snow thickness changes for Arctic sites in Fig. 4a,b. However, there is not, as yet, a reliable consistent data set onsnow thickness applicable for high elevation regions or Antarctica.Thepropagationoftemperaturechangeintheatmospheredownward to the depth of Z*can take up to several years, but thetime varies depending on the surface characteristics, the subsurfaceice content, and the soil thermal diffusivitiy24,25. We took this laginto account by averaging over the previous 4 years for each yearconsidered, but there was no signi\ufb01cant correlation at an annualresolution between permafrost temperature departures at Z*depthand 2-m air temperature anomalies derived from ERA Interim dataalone (Fig. 4). This lack of correlation can be attributed to thediscrepancy between the scale at which borehole observations areconducted and the spatial resolution of 80 km for the gridded air-temperature reanalysis data26 and because in permafrost regions, thereanalysis output is more dependent on the model structure anddata assimilation methods than in data-rich regions27; local micro-and secondary climate effects28; and buffering layers at the air-ground interface5that in\ufb02uence the thermal response of permafrostto short-term changes in air temperature.Previous studies have shown that these surface effects,along with the thermal diffusivity of the underlying materials,act as a buffer that reduces the effect of short-term climateacbda-b Modern permafrost temperature (mean \u00b0C of 2014\u20132016)c-d Temperature change rate of permafrost (\u00b0C per decade)Continuous permafrost Discontinuous permafrost\u201320.0\u201310.0\u20135.0\u20133.0\u20132.0\u20131.00.00.5<\u20131.6\u20131.2\u20130.8\u20130.4\u20130.10.10.40.81.2>1.6Fig. 2 Permafrost temperature and rate of change near the depth of zero annual amplitude. a,bMean annual ground temperatures for 2014\u20132016 in theNorthern Hemisphere and Antarctica, n=129 boreholes. c,dDecadal change rate of permafrost temperature from 2007 to 2016, n=123 boreholes(Eq. 3). Changes within the average measurement accuracy of ~\u00b10.1 \u00b0C are coded in green. Continuous permafrost zone (>90% coverage); discontinuouspermafrost zones (<90% coverage). Permafrost zones are derived from the International Permafrost Association (IPA) map46. World Borders data arederived from http://thematicmapping.org/downloads/world_borders.php and licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/)NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-4 ARTICLENATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:264 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08 240-4| www.nature.com/naturecommunications 3 variation2,3,5\u20137,29. Thus, short-term meteorological phenomenaare increasingly attenuated and delayed with depth, and the meanpermafrost temperature changes near the depth of Z*generallyfollow the atmosphere\u2019s long-term trend. Mean surface airtemperature changes calculated from ERA Interim data at theborehole locations (Fig. 5b) are similar to those for permafrosttemperature with respect to direction and order of magnitude.The decadal change rates of air temperature were estimated to0.86 \u00b1 0.84 \u00b0C per reference decade in the Arctic continuouspermafrost zone, 0.63 \u00b1 0.91 \u00b0C dec\ue0011Ref in the Arctic discontinuouspermafrost zone, and 0.1 \u00b1 0.50 \u00b0C dec\ue0011Ref in mountain perma-frost. Air temperature trends in Antarctica (annual mean 0.10 \u00b10.55\u00b0C dec\ue0011Ref , June\u2013August mean \u20130.48 \u00b1 0.91 \u00b0C dec\ue0011Ref ,unweighted median \u20130.12, Fig. 5b), however, do not match theobserved strong permafrost warming. This discrepancy is due tolarge climatic differences between the Antarctic Peninsula andeastern Antarctica30,31, the small number of boreholes that ful\ufb01llthe quality criteria, and the principal climate model bias inAntarctica32.Air temperature trends in the Arctic continuous permafrostzone correspond well with permafrost temperature change rates(Figs. 3a and 4a), suggesting that enhanced warming ofpermafrost in the High Arctic re\ufb02ects the polar ampli\ufb01cation ofrecent atmospheric warming22. However, in the Arctic discontin-uous permafrost zone, air temperatures were statisticallyunchanged between 2006 and 2014 while permafrost tempera-tures increased. We found that snow dynamics, the time lagbetween air and ground temperature, and the latent heat effectserve as concurrent explanations for this phenomenon.Snow thickness changes. The snow cover reduces the upwardtransfer of energy from the ground to the air during winter33,34.Distinct peaks in the mean snow depth in 2009, 2011 and from2013 onward (Fig. 4a, b) suggest that the observed continuedwarming of discontinuous permafrost is facilitated by increasingsnow thickness. Compared to the Arctic continuous permafrostzone, the mean snow cover in the discontinuous zone arrivedabout 1 week later, reached its maximum insulation 1 monthearlier, and also disappeared half a month earlier. Compared to2007\u20132009 the snow cover in 2014\u20132016 in the discontinuouszone started to form 13.7 days earlier, reached its maximuminsulation effect 37.7 days earlier, and disappeared 9.3 days earlier(Fig. 4f). It was shown previously that a difference of only 10 dayscaused signi\ufb01cant warming in Alaska35. Increases of shrub heightand density that trap wind drifting snow is likely also aSites602008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016300Temperature change (\u00b0C)a0.6\u20130.200.20.4Arctic continuous permafrost2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016d0.6\u20130.200.20.4Antarctic permafrost1005Sites502008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016250Temperature change (\u00b0C)c0.6\u20130.200.20.4Mountain permafrost2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 201620400b0.6\u20130.200.20.4Arctic discontinuous permafrostFig. 3 Annual permafrost temperature change. a\u2013dPermafrost temperature departure \u0394\ue001Ty;bcalculated from mean annual ground temperatures inboreholes near the depth of zero annual amplitude Z*relative to the 2008\u20132009 reference period. Mean values calculated as de-clustered, indexed area-weighted averages (Eq. 1). Temperature uncertainties are expressed at 95% con\ufb01dence. Sample size shown is the number of borehole sites per year andregionARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-44NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:264 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08 240-4| www.nature.com/naturecommunications contributing factor36. All of these changes provide evidence ofincreased protection of the ground from low temperatures duringwinter37,38. Snow timing differences within the continuous zoneare less distinct but show a generally similar trend (Fig. 4e, f).DiscussionAn important factor that explains the general discrepancybetween mean annual temperature changes at Z*in permafrostand the atmosphere is that permafrost progressively with depth\u201cremembers\u201dthe surface temperature history of the past severalyears25,39. The temporal dimension of episodes with lower airtemperatures between 2009 and 2013 in the Arctic (Fig. 4a, b),and around 2012 in the mountains (Fig. 4c), relative to precedingperiod of higher air temperatures, however, was not large enoughto sustainably impact the general warming trend of permafrost.We partly attribute the difference in ground temperaturechange between the continuous permafrost and the discontinuouspermafrost zones to the latent heat effect. In this process, the ice-water phase change associated with warmer permafrost in the2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016Air temperature change (\u00b0C)snow depth change (cm 10\u20131)aAir 2 m above arctic continuous permafrost aArctic continuous permafrost zone2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016dAntarctic permafrost area\u20131.001.02.0Air temperature change (\u00b0C)2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016cMountain permafrost area\u20131.001.02.02000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016\u20131.001.02.0 bArctic discontinuous permafrost zone\u20131.001.02.0AirSnowdepthAirSnowdepthAirAirn = 6n = 53 n = 36n = 282000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016Snow onset, insulation maximum, and ending AprNovDecJanFebMarJulMayJun2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016fArctic discontinuous permafrost zoneAprNovDecJann = 36FebMarn = 53SIM/50 cmSO/6 cmSIM/50 cmSO/6 cmJulMayJuneArctic continuous permafrost zoneSE/1 cmSE/1 cmFig. 4 Annual air temperature and snow depth changes. a\u2013dAir temperature anomaly \u0394^Ty;brelative to the 1981\u20132010 reference period calculated frommean annual air temperatures at 2-m height above the ground level interpolated from the ERA Interim reanalysis data set. Mean values calculated as de-clustered, indexed area-weighted averages (Eq. 4). Dark colored dashed lines indicate 4-year end-point running means. Snow depth changes \u0394^Sy;bin aandb, indicated in gray, calculated as the difference relative to the 1999\u20132010 reference period from the CMC reanalysis data set (eq. 5). e,fOnset of snowSO, snow insulation maximum SIM (dashed line), and the end of snow melt SE. Uncertainties are expressed as shading at 95% con\ufb01dence. Sample size nindicates the number of boreholesNATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-4 ARTICLENATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:264 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08 240-4| www.nature.com/naturecommunications 5 discontinuous zone (Fig. 2a, b) reduces the response of groundtemperature to changes in air temperature4. Cold permafrosttherefore exhibits a greater response to changing air temperaturecompared to permafrost with a temperature close to 0 \u00b0C4,40.The warming of permafrost observed since IPY continues thetrends documented prior to IPY41. Our global analysis suggeststhat the future increases in air temperature projected undercurrent climate scenarios42 will result in continued permafrostwarming. The duration of our time-series, however, does not yetpermit predictive analysis of non-linear climate-permafrost rela-tions as the latent heat effect is stronger near 0 \u00b0C and surfacecharacteristics are not constant. However, observations of thaw atsome of the observation sites demonstrate that the latent heatrequirement cannot inde\ufb01nitely delay permafrost warming downto depths of about 15 m observed in this study (Fig. 6), norprevent the eventual thawing of permafrost. This could have wideimplications in terms of permafrost degradation and release ofgreenhouse gases from decomposition of organic matter.The SWIPA 2017 report41 gave an estimate of 0.5 \u00b0C warmingof permafrost in very cold areas such as the High Arctic since IPY(2007\u20132009). This is similar to our network observations ofstrong warming within the Arctic continuous permafrost zoneand of continued warming elsewhere. The assessment of per-mafrost temperature trends presented in this paper can facilitatevalidation of models to project thawing of permafrost down to thedepth of Z*and associated impacts with respect to feedbacks tothe climate system.The current global coverage of permafrost temperature mon-itoring is not yet ideal, due to the limited sampling in regionssuch as Siberia, central Canada, Antarctica, and the Himalayanand Andes mountains. Furthermore, even though the data usedwere quality checked and are as complete as possible, logisticalchallenges during \ufb01eldwork caused gaps in the time series. Betterassessments of the evolution of the thermal state of permafrost,including consideration of non-linear system behavior, will ben-e\ufb01t from ongoing efforts to enhance the global network spatiallyand extend the length of the record. Enhancing existing mon-itoring sites through co-location with meteorological stationscould further improve understanding of microclimate and buffer-layer in\ufb02uences, and would also provide the data necessary for acomprehensive assessment of permafrost responses to ongoingclimate change.The newly compiled GTN-P data set has facilitated assessmentof trends in permafrost temperatures and can also contribute toimproved representation of permafrost dynamics in climatemodels and the reduction of uncertainty in the prediction offuture conditions.MethodsField observations of permafrost temperatures. Boreholes were established andtemperatures were recorded during annually repeated \ufb01eldwork campaigns in polarand high-elevation areas. Temperature was measured either by lowering a cali-brated thermistor into a borehole, or recorded using permanently installed multi-sensor cables43. Measurements were recorded either manually with a portabletemperature system or by automated continuous data logging. At some boreholesites, permafrost thawed at the measurement depth during the period of obser-vations. The criterion to include non-permafrost sites in the global change calcu-lation was that ground temperatures near the depth of the Z*were below 0 \u00b0C untilthe end of the IPY reference period in 2009.ACPn = 53ADPn = 36MPn = 28ANPn = 6Temperature difference (\u00b0C)\u22120.501\u22121012baPermafrostAir0.5***Fig. 5 Decadal temperature change rates at permafrost borehole sites.aBoxplots showing the regional (unweighted) distribution of permafrosttemperature change rates near the depth of zero annual amplitude Z*calculated for 2007\u20132016 in \u00b0C per decade (Eq. 3). * indicate signi\ufb01cantdifference to 0, p< 0.05 de\ufb01ned by the Wilcoxon Signed-Rank test. pvaluesACP: 0.000, ADP: 0.002, MP: 0.016, and ANP: 0.156 (rounded to threedigits). The Kruskal\u2013Wallis test indicated pvalues > 0.05 for couples thatare tied with brackets in the graph. bAir temperature change rates at 2 mheight above ground at borehole sites in \u00b0C per decade, calculated from theERA Interim reanalysis data for 2004\u20132016, separated by regions. Symbols:nnumber of boreholes, ACP Arctic continuous permafrost, ADP Arcticdiscontinuous permafrost, MP mountain permafrost, ANP Antarcticpermafrost. Boxes represent 25\u201375% quartiles and whiskers are 1.5interquartile ranges from the median. Medians are shown as black lines302010ab1512Depth (m)Sensorsn = 154Z*n = 91\u201310+1T difference (\u00b0C dec\u20131)\u226412 mn = 51>12 mn = 72**Fig. 6 Depth distribution of borehole temperatures. aBoxplots showing thedepth distribution of temperature measurements (sensor depths) and ofthe zero annual amplitude Z*in the boreholes. bTemperature distributionin borehole sensors that are shallower (\u226412 m) and deeper (>12 m) thanthe median of Z*. * indicate signi\ufb01cant difference to 0, p< 0.05 de\ufb01ned bythe Wilcoxon Signed-Rank test; pvalues \u226412 m: 0.000, >12 m: 0.000(rounded to three digits). The Kruskal\u2013Wallis test between these zones(b) resulted in p=0.908, indicating that the zones are not signi\ufb01cantlydifferent to each other. Boxplots represent 25\u201375% quartiles and whiskersare 1.5 interquartile ranges from the median. Medians are shown as blacklines and labeled with values. The number of boreholes (sensors), and thenumber of available Z*values is indicated by nARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-46NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:264 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08 240-4| www.nature.com/naturecommunications Compiling permafrost temperature data. Permafrost temperature data areassembled in the Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost (GTN-P) Database16.They are then transferred to a global data set after a 1-year embargo to allowauthors to publish their local \ufb01ndings \ufb01rst. Within the GTN-P Data ManagementSystem the data presented were harmonized, quality checked and \ufb01ltered to gen-erate a standardized global permafrost borehole data set. Data standardization wasperformed during data entry into the database following international geospatialmetadata standards ISO 19115/2 and TC/221. The data management system isbased on an object-oriented data model, accessible online at http://gtnpdatabase.org. The GTN-P mean annual ground temperature\ue001Tcompilation is accessibleonline at https://doi.org/10.1594/PANGAEA.884711.A total of 154 boreholes with 1264\ue001Tvalues were used in this study. Dataanalyses of decadal permafrost temperature change were based on 123 boreholesand 1033\ue001Tvalues calculated from > 105sensor observations.Calculating permafrost temperature change. We used the R environment44 tocalculate the mean permafrost temperature change for every borehole from quality-\ufb01ltered\ue001Tdata. The same measurement depth was used each year for a borehole.The depth was chosen to be the nearest available sensor to the depth of Z*, thedepth at which seasonal changes in temperature are \u22640.1 \u00b0C (Fig. 7). The nearestdepth to Z*was detected by either an algorithm calculating the difference betweenannual maximum (summer) and minimum (winter) temperature in the originaldata starting from the shallowest depth downwards and using cubic spline inter-polation between thermistors and a threshold set to sensor accuracy, or by visualinspection of annual maximum and minimum temperature measurements plottedversus depth (Fig. 7). Because the depth of Z*varies over time as temperaturechanges, we used an average estimated for the observation period. The datarevealed that 19.5% of measurements were from above Z*. 59.8% of measurementsrepresented Z*and 20.7% were from below Z*. Measurements from boreholes thathad no reliable indication of Z*had a mean depth of 17.1 m, which is well belowthe average of all indicated Z*values (mean 14.1 m, median 12 m). Thus, the datadistribution represents an approximation to Z*which minimizes the potential biascaused by seasonal \ufb02uctuations.We created a data set that re\ufb02ects long-term climate change and avoids largetemperature \ufb02uctuations caused by seasonal phenomena, e.g., in Antarctica, byexcluding data from shallow boreholes that did not reach Z*. Because Z*could notbe determined in all boreholes the minimum depth was set to 10 m. However, \ufb01veboreholes with depths between 6.7 m and 10 m were included (GTN-P ID\u2019s16: 137,860, 861, 877, and 1192), because their depths were equal to Z*, and seasonal\ufb02uctuations were less than the instrument precision and accuracy. Boreholes thatful\ufb01lled the quality criteria but were not included in this analysis due to depthconstraints, represented 22.6% of the original data set. 8.6% were excluded from theArctic continuous data set; 23.4% from the Arctic discontinuous data set; 30.0%from the mountain data set; and 57.1% from the Antarctic data set. Statisticallyindifferent temperature trends of the remaining shallow (\u226412 m) and deeper(>12 m, max. 40 m) boreholes in the utilized data set con\ufb01rm that the observeddepths near Z*(Fig. 6b) provide a representative sample tracking climate variabilitycoherently.We applied different methods to extract information on permafrosttemperature changes in single years, in single boreholes and for decadal changes inthe permafrost regions, described as follows: We de\ufb01ne a set i={2007,...,2016} toidentify the years. To identify the boreholes b we use the GTN-P Database ID.Continuous (full-year) records started at a large number of borehole sites in 2008,the second year of the 4th International Polar Year (IPY). To base the referenceperiod for the annual departure calculation on the largest possible number ofboreholes we exclude 2007 and estimate the annual differences in\ue001Tin year y2iand borehole b as\u0394\ue001Ty;b\u00bc\ue001Ty;b\ue0011=2\ue001T2008;b\u00fe\ue001T2009;b\ue001\ue003 \u00f01\u00deThe last term on the right-hand side of Eq. (1) serves as our mean value for thereference period. We compare this reference period to the latest available meanvalue period and calculate\u0394\ue001Tbto rank total temperature differences amongboreholes.\u0394\ue001Tb\u00bc1=2\ue001T2015;b\u00fe\ue001T2016;b\ue001\ue003\ue0011=2\ue001T2008;b\u00fe\ue001T2009;b\ue001\ue003\u00f02\u00deEquations (1) and (2) require data to be available in each of the observation years.To calculate the rate of temperature change per decade we follow a thirdapproach using the primary mean annual ground temperature data set\ue001Tbfor allavailable years in iand perform linear regression, according to the followingattribution of our data in the regression equation:\ue001Tregb\u00bcab\u00fecbx\u00f03\u00dewhere\ue001Tregbis the regression estimate of\ue001Tb,abis the vertical intercept (the startingtemperature in a borehole), cbis the slope of the regression line, and xis the rangeof years involved.The requirement to perform linear regression on b was that iincluded at leastone value yin the IPY period (2007, 2008, or 2009), one value in the modernreference period (2015 or 2016) and a minimum of \ufb01ve values in total. Wecalculated the rate of temperature change in each borehole as the slope of the linearregression cbusing the linear model function (lm) in the R environment. Togenerate decadal change values, we extrapolated 37.7% of the borehole data in theArctic continuous zone, 47.3% in the Arctic discontinuous zone, 29.3% in themountain zone and 100% in Antarctica for 1\u20133 years.The consistency of temperature time series in boreholes depends on sustaineddata collection at remote sites. At some boreholes, instrumentation was destroyed,damaged or malfunctioned leading to interruptions in data collection45. To avoidbroken data runs affecting the annual means, measurements at frequencies greaterthan monthly (e.g. daily or hourly), were aggregated to monthly means beforecalculating annual means. Mean annual values were based on at least monthlyprimary data. Data points based on fewer than one measurement every month wereallowed only if the sensor depth was equal to or below the depth of zero annualamplitude. Annual means were calculated from original measurements as calendar-year means in the GTN-P Database. Meteorological years in permafrost areasdepend on the onset and termination of the freezing and thaw periods, and inprevious studies varied spatially. We therefore indicated the starting month of theperiod in the data set. Mean values contain only the available valid\ue001Tdata in eachyear, and thus the number of borehole temperatures included in change-ratecalculations varies between years.To evaluate temperature changes in the Arctic continuous and discontinuouspermafrost zones, in the mountain permafrost and in permafrost in Antarctica, weapplied a spatial de-clustering prior to calculating mean values of temperaturechanges from the boreholes. The spatial de-clustering reduces the bias in thecalculation of means caused by an inhomogeneous (clustered) spatial distributionof the boreholes. We grouped the boreholes into ten world zones (Fig. 8) andde\ufb01ned the areas underlain by permafrost by correlating the boreholes with theInternational Permafrost Association (IPA) permafrost zones46. Arctic continuouspermafrost represents the mean of four different zones: Arctic continuouspermafrost West (2.41 \u00d7 106km2), Arctic continuous permafrost West islands(1.57 \u00d7 106km2), Arctic continuou s permafrost Europe (0.22 \u00d7 106km2), andArctic continuous permafrost East (Asia) (6.62 \u00d7 106km2). Arctic discontinuouspermafrost is averaged over three zones: Arctic discontinuous permafrost West(3.91 \u00d7 106km2), Arctic discontinuou s permafrost East (Asia) (3.86 \u00d7 106km2),and Arctic discontinuou s permafrost Europe (0.28 \u00d7 106km2). Mountainpermafrost is averaged over two zones: Chinese mountains (2.07 \u00d7 106km2), andOther mountains (2.33 \u00d7 106km2) including the Alps and other sites with highelevations >1000 m a.s.l. such as in Scandina via and the North AmericanCordillera. Antarctica is treated as one zone (0.05 \u00d7 106km26,47). For comparingtemperature trends between North American and north Asian permafrost wede\ufb01ne two separate data sets by excluding southern, European, and central Asianboreholes. Within the zones, clusters of boreholes close together were groupedwhen the sum of longitude and latitude differences were <0.1 decimal degree andthe\ue001Tvalues of adjacent boreholes were averaged before calculating the meantemperature change.To estimate the mean annual temperature change in each zone we applied area-weighted arithmetic averaging of\ue001Tvalues in boreholes. To preserve the signal of localoutlier trends showing atypical temperature change directions and magnitudes (e.g.,in parts of Antarctica and in Qu\u00e9bec, Canada), we did not use medians. To suppressnear-surface and geothermal changes indices of boreholes were distributed as threepossible integers to multiply the sites before averaging, according to the followingcriteria: (i)\ue001Tis available in each year of the reference periods indicated in Eqs. (1)and(2), and (ii)\ue001Tdepth is equal to the depth of Z*and >10 m (few exceptions were madeaccording to the depth of Z*as described above).Winter SummerZero annual amplitude Z*PermafrostActive layerNon-cryoticDepthTemperature (\u00b0C)0\u2013+TFig. 7 Thermal regime of permafrost. Schematic showing the maximum(red line) and minimum ground temperature (blue line) during the year,and their convergence to give the mean annual ground temperature\ue001Tat thedepth of zero annual amplitude Z*. Black dots show the schematic meantemperature for permafrost soils. Compiled guided by French53NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-4 ARTICLENATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:264 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08 240-4| www.nature.com/naturecommunications 7 Calculating air temperature change. The set of air temperature data monitored atborehole sites is incomplete. To develop data comparable to the permafrost tem-perature data, we calculated mean annual air temperatures (^T) from ERA Interim2 m air temperature data set with 80 km spatial resolution. We derived the rea-nalysis time series for each borehole from linear interpolation of the four nearestgrid points surrounding the borehole coordinates. Mean annual values were cal-culated from December until November. Given, that the propagation of atmo-spheric temperature change downward to the depth of Z*takes up to severalyears25,37, depending on the local thermal diffusivity24, we extended the time seriesshown in Fig. 4backwards to 2000 and used the standard reference period1981\u20132010 to estimate anomalies.We de\ufb01ne a set j={1981,...,2016} to identify the years being considered. We usethe coordinates of boreholes bde\ufb01ned in Eq. (1) and calculate the annual differencefor speci\ufb01cyearsy2jin^Tas\u0394^Ty;b\u00bc^Ty;b\ue001130 X2010j\u00bc1981^Tj;b\u00f04\u00deBased on the average propagation of surface temperature towards Z*of 4 years25 wecalculated 4-year end-point running means to compare air temperature withpermafrost temperature changes. To calculate the rate of temperature change over adecade, we apply linear regression on^Ty;bfor all y2jusing the linear model functionin the R environment and the slope of the linear regression in an annual arraybetween 2004 and 2016 and multiplied the annual change rates by 10. Data analysesof air temperature change were based on 137 borehole sites and 4932^Tvalues.Calculating snow thickness change. We calculated the mean annual snowthickness (^S) for the Arctic continuous and the discontinuous permafrost zonefrom the Canadian Meteorological Centre (CMC) daily snow depth analysis datawith 24 km spatial resolution48. We derived the reanalysis time series for eachborehole from linear interpolation of the four nearest grid points surrounding theborehole coordinates. Mean values were calculated from December until Februaryfor each year in the data set. To identify winters we use subsequent years, e.g. in thetime series we assign the 1999\u20132000 winter to 2000.Given that 1999 is the earliest available year in the data set we de\ufb01ne a set k={1999,...,2016} to identify the winter years, where y2k. We use the coordinates ofboreholes b de\ufb01ned in Eq. (1) and calculate the annual difference in^Sas\u0394^Sy;b\u00bc^Sy;b\ue001112 X2010k\u00bc1999^Sk;b\u00f05\u00deThe onset snow has an impact on the ground thermal regime. To assess the onsetof snow cover, we assemble a set of snow depths dates at daily resolution between 1September and 30 April in a set of days l={1,2,3,...,242} for every year in k. In leapyears l={1,2,3,...,243}. To calculate the onset date of snow SO we use the \ufb01rst daydSOk;breaching 6 cm in lfor which the following 5 days, adding up to a synoptic timescale of 6 days, retain a daily snow cover of at least 6 cm49.The insulation maximum of snow SIM is reached when the snow coveraccumulated to a thickness between 40 and 50 cm33,37. Accordingly, we set SIMbased on the \ufb01rst day dSIMk;bin lreaching 50 cm, or, if it is not reached, take the dayrepresenting the maximum snow cover in l(below 50 cm).To assess the end of snow cover SE, we assemble the snow depth dates at dailyresolution between 1 September and 30 August in a set m={1,2,3,...,365} for everyyear in k. In leap years m={1,2,3,...,366}. To calculate SE we use the \ufb01rst day dSEk;binmreaching down to less than 1 cm after a decreasin g gradient of at least 8 cm over6 days, or, if this gradient is not reached, the \ufb01rst day of at least 6 subsequent snowfree (<1 cm) days.Measurement accuracy. The reported measurement accuracy of our temperatureobservations, including manual and automated logging systems, varied from \u00b10.01to \u00b10.25 \u00b0C with a mean of \u00b10.08 \u00b0C. Previous tests have shown the comparabilityof different measurement techniques to have an overall accuracy of \u00b10.1 \u00b0C3.Thermistors are the most commonly used sensors for borehole measurements.Their accuracy depends on (1) the materials and process used to construct thethermistor, (2) the circuitry used to measure the thermistor resistance, (3) thecalibration and equation used to convert measured resistance to temperature, and(4) the aging and resulting drift of the sensor over time. Thermistors are typicallycalibrated to correct for variations due to (1) and (2). About 20% of the boreholesare visited once per year and measured at or below Z*using single thermistors anda data logger. In this case the system is routinely validated in an ice-bath allowingcorrection for any calibration drift. The accuracy of an ice-bath is ~\u00b1 0.01 \u00b0C50.Using the offset determined during this validation to correct the data greatlyincreases the measurement accuracy near 0 \u00b0C, an important reference point forpermafrost. The remaining systems are permanently installed and typically ice-bathcalibrated at 0 \u00b0C before deployment. The calibration drift is dif\ufb01cult to quantify asthermistor chains are not frequently removed for re-calibration or validation. Inmany cases removal of thermistor chains becomes impossible some time afterdeployment, e.g. because of borehole shearing.The drift rate among bead thermistors from different manufacturers was <0.01 \u00b0C per year during a 2 year experiment at 0, 30, and 60 \u00b0C51. The calibration drift ofglass bead thermistors was found to be 0.01 mK per year52, at an ambienttemperature of 20 \u00b0C. A single drifting thermistor in a chain is detectable throughits anomalous temporal trend. Such data were excluded from our data set. Theabsolute accuracy of borehole temperature measurements, in terms of theirrepresentativeness of the temperature distribution in undisturbed soil, also dependson the depth accuracy of the sensors\u2019positions in the borehole. This study isconcerned with temperatures at Z*, where temperature gradients are typically small(<0.1 \u00b0C m\u22121). Consequently, mm-level positioning accuracy does not signi\ufb01cantlyimpact measurement accuracy. Finally, as this study is concerned with annualaverages, adequate chronometry is ensured.The above discussion of accuracy relates to the absolute temperature valuesmeasured, but the detection of temperature change is more accurate because errorsin calibration offset have no impact, sensor nonlinearities are generally small andnot of concern. We therefore consider <0.1 \u00b0C a conservative average estimate ofthe accuracy of temperature change on an individual sensor basis.Con\ufb01dence intervals and statistical signi\ufb01cance. Permafrost and air tempera-ture departure from 2008 until 2016 (\u0394\ue001Ti;band \u0394^Ty;b) and the regression from2007 until 2016 of each borehole were used to calculate the 95% con\ufb01denceintervals within each world zone using a Student t-test in the R environment (52%p< 0.05, 48% p> 0.05, mean |t|=3.4). The upper and lower con\ufb01dence boundariesAntarcticaArctic continuous EArctic discontinuous EArctic continuous EurArctic discontinuous EurMountains ChinaMountains otherArctic continuous W Arctic discontinuous WArctic continuous W islandsContinuousDiscontinuousFactor 1Factor 2Factor 3Permafrost zoneBorehole weightingBorehole groupingbaFig. 8 Weighting and grouping of boreholes. Map showing the indices andzoning of boreholes prior to area-weighting and calculation of meantemperature changes. aNorthern Hemisphere. bAntarctica. Permafrostzones are derived from the International Permafrost Association (IPA)map46. World Borders data are derived from http://thematicmapping.org/downloads/world_borders.php and licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/)ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-48NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:264 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08 240-4| www.nature.com/naturecommunications were calculated from de-clustered and indexed boreholes. Mean con\ufb01denceintervals for composite permafrost zones (global, Arctic continuous, Arctic dis-continuous, mountain, Asian and American) were area-weighted. Antarcticaconsists of one zone and thus area-weighting is not applicable. Given a non-normal, unimodal, and only slightly skewed distribution of data in similarly shapedsubsets (regions) gained by eq. 3(Figs. 5,6), we performed a Wilcoxon Signed-Rank test and a Kruskal\u2013Wallis test to assess the signi\ufb01cance of the difference tozero and the differences between medians, respectively. To consider false positives,we performed a False Discovery Rate adjustment of the p-values, resulting in 43.3%p< 0.05, 56.6% p> 0.05, median 0.08 in a data matrix of 9 years (eq. 1) versus 10permafrost world zones indicated in Fig. 8. Boxplots represent 25\u201375% quartilesand whiskers are 1.5 interquartile ranges from the median.Data availabilityThe GTN-P global mean annual ground temperature data for permafrost near thedepth of zero annual amplitude (2007\u20132016) is accessible online at https://doi.org/10.1594/PANGAEA.884711.Received: 5 January 2018 Accepted: 21 December 2018References1. Gruber, S. Derivation and analysis of a high-resolution estimate of globalpermafrost zonation. Cryosphere 6, 221\u2013233 (2012).2. Christiansen, H. H. et al. The thermal state of permafrost in the Nordic Areaduring the International Polar Year 2007-2009. Permafrost Periglac. Process.21, 156\u2013181 (2010).3. Romanovsky, V. E. et al. Thermal state of permafrost in Russia. PermafrostPeriglac. Process. 21, 136\u2013155 (2010).4. Romanovsky, V. E., Smith, S. L. & Christiansen, H. H. Permafrost thermalstate in the Polar Northern Hemisphere during the international polar year2007-2009: a synthesis. Permafrost Periglac. Process. 21, 106\u2013116 (2010).5. Smith, S. L. et al. Thermal state of permafrost in North America: acontribution to the international polar year. Permafrost Periglac. Process. 21,117\u2013135 (2010).6. Vieira, G. et al. Thermal state of permafrost and active-layer monitoring in theantarctic: advances during the international polar year 2007\u20132009. PermafrostPeriglac. Process. 21, 182\u2013197 (2010).7. Zhao, L., Wu, Q., Marchenko, S. S. & Sharkhuu, N. Thermal state ofpermafrost and active layer in central asia during the international polar year.Permafrost Periglac. Process. 21, 198\u2013207 (2010).8. Pepin, N. et al. Elevation-dependent warming in mountain regions of theworld. Nat. Clim. Change 5, 424\u2013430 (2015).9. Chadburn, S. E. et al. An observation-based constraint on permafrost loss as afunction of global warming. Nat. Clim. Change 7, 340\u2013344 (2017).10. Larsen, J. N. & Fondahl, G. Arctic human development report: regionalprocesses and global linkages (Nordic Council of Ministers, 2015).11. Hjort, J. et al. Degrading permafrost puts Arctic infrastructure at risk by mid-century. Nat. Commun. 9, 5147 (2018).12. Haeberli, W., Schaub, Y. & Huggel, C. Increasing risks related to landslidesfrom degrading permafrost into new lakes in de-glaciating mountain ranges.Geomorphology 293, 405\u2013417 (2017).13. Bowden, W. B. Climate change in the arctic \u2013permafrost, thermokarst, andwhy they matter to the Non-Arctic world. Geogr. Compass 4, 1553\u20131566(2010).14. Schaefer, K., Lantuit, H., Romanovsky, V. E., Schuur, E. A. & Witt, R. Theimpact of the permafrost carbon feedback on global climate. Environ. Res.Lett. 9, 9 (2014).15. Schuur, E. A. G. et al. Climate change and the permafrost carbon feedback.Nature 520, 171\u2013179 (2015).16. Biskaborn, B. K. et al. The new database of the Global Terrestrial Network forPermafrost (GTN-P). Earth Syst. Sci. Data 7, 245\u2013259 (2015).17. Serreze, M. C. et al. Observational evidence of recent change in the northernhigh-latitude environment. Clim. Change 46, 159\u2013207 (2000).18. Harris, C. et al. Warming permafrost in European mountains. Glob. Planet.Change 39, 215\u2013225 (2003).19. Harris, C. et al. Permafrost and climate in Europe: monitoring and modellingthermal, geomorphological and geotechnical responses. Earth-Sci. Rev. 92,117\u2013171 (2009).20. Streletskiy, D. et al. Permafrost thermal state. Bull. Amer. Meteor. Soc.98,19\u201321 (2017).21. Liu, G. et al. Permafrost warming in the context of step-wise climate change inthe tien shan mountains, China. Permafrost Periglac. Process. 28, 130\u2013139(2017).22. Huang, J. et al. Recently ampli\ufb01ed arctic warming has contributed to acontinual global warming trend. Nat. Clim. Change 7, 875\u2013879 (2017).23. Dee, D. P. et al. The ERA-Interim reanalysis: con\ufb01guration and performanceof the data assimilation system. Q. J. R. Meteorol. Soc. 137, 553\u2013597 (2011).24. Kusuda, T. & Achenbach, P. R. Earth temperature and thermal diffusivity atselected stations in the United States (National Bureau of Standards. GaithersburgMD, 1965).25. Lachenbruch, A. H. & Marshall, B. V. Changing climate: geothermal evidencefrom permafrost in the Alaskan Arctic. Science 234, 689\u2013696 (1986).26. Fiddes, J. & Gruber, S. TopoSCALE v. 1.0: downscaling gridded climate data incomplex terrain. Geosci. Model Dev. 7, 387\u2013405 (2014).27. Lindsay, R., Wensnahan, M., Schweiger, A. & Zhang, J. Evaluation of sevendifferent atmospheric reanalysis products in the Arctic. J. Clim. 27, 2588\u20132606(2014).28. Biskaborn, B. K. et al. Late Quaternary vegetation and lake system dynamics innorth-eastern Siberia: implications for seasonal climate variability. Quat. Sci.Rev. 147, 406\u2013421 (2016).29. Gubler, S., Fiddes, J., Keller, M. & Gruber, S. Scale-dependent measurementand analysis of ground surface temperature variability in alpine terrain.Cryosphere 5, 431\u2013443 (2011).30. Turner, J. et al. Absence of 21st century warming on Antarctic Peninsulaconsistent with natural variability. Nature 535, 411\u2013415 (2016).31. Oliva, M. et al. Recent regional climate cooling on the Antarctic Peninsulaand associated impacts on the cryosphere. Sci. Total Environ. 580, 210\u2013223(2017).32. Jones, P. D. & Lister, D. H. Antarctic near\u2010surface air temperaturescompared with ERA\u2010Interim values since 1979. Int. J. Climatol. 35, 1354\u20131366(2015).33. Park, H., Fedorov, A. N., Zheleznyak, M. N., Konstantinov, P. Y. & Walsh, J.E. Effect of snow cover on pan-Arctic permafrost thermal regimes. Clim.Dynam. 44, 2873\u20132895 (2015).34. Park, H., Sherstiukov, A. B., Fedorov, A. N., Polyakov, I. V. & Walsh, J. E. Anobservation-based assessment of the in\ufb02uences of air temperature and snowdepth on soil temperature in Russia. Environ. Res. Lett. 9,https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/9/6/064026 (2014).35. Ling, F. & Zhang, T. J. Impact of the timing and duration of seasonal snowcover on the active layer and permafrost in the Alaskan Arctic. PermafrostPeriglac. Process. 14, 141\u2013150 (2003).36. Paradis, M., Levesque, E. & Boudreau, S. Greater effect of increasing shrubheight on winter versus summer soil temperature. Environ. Res. Lett. 11,https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/11/8/085005 (2016).37. Zhang, T. J. In\ufb02uence of the seasonal snow cover on the ground thermalregime: an overview. Rev. Geophys. 43,https://doi.org/10.1029/2004rg000157(2005).38. Burn, C. R. & Zhang, Y. Permafrost andclimate change at Herschel Island(Qikiqtaruq), Yukon Territory, Canada. J. Geophys. Res. Atmos. 114,https://doi.org/10.1029/2008jf001087 (2009).39. Zhang, Y., Chen, W. J. & Riseborough, D. W. Temporal and spatial changes ofpermafrost in Canada since the end of the Little Ice Age. J. Geophys. Res.Atmos. 111,https://doi.org/10.1029/2006jd007284 (2006).40. James, M., Lewkowicz, A. G., Smith, S. L. & Miceli, C. M. Multi-decadaldegradation and persistence of permafrost in the Alaska Highway corridor,northwest Canada. Environ. Res. Lett. 8,https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/8/4/045013 (2013).41. Romanovsky, V. et al. in Snow, Water, Ice and Permafrost in the Arctic(SWIPA) 65-102 (Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme, 2017).42. Raftery, A. E., Zimmer, A., Frierson, D. M. W., Startz, R. & Liu, P. R.Less than 2\u00b0 C warming by 2100 unlikely. Nat. Clim. Change 7, 637\u2013641(2017).43. Streletskiy, D et al. Strategy and Implementation Plan 2016-2020 for the GlobalTerrestrial Network for Permafrost (GTN-P). (The George WashingtonUniversity, Washington D.C., 2017).44. R Development Core Team. R: A language and environment for statisticalcomputing. (R Foundation for Statistical Computing, 2012).45. Luethi, R. & Phillips, M. Challenges and solutions for long-term permafrostborehole temperature monitoring and data interpretation. Geogr. Helv. 71,121\u2013131 (2016).46. Brown, J., Ferrians, O. J. J., Heginbottom, J. A. & Melnikov, E. S. Circum-Arctic Map of Permafrost and Ground-Ice Conditions (National Snow and IceData Center, 1998).47. Bockheim, J., Campbell, I., Guglielmin, M. & L\u00f3pez-Mart\u0131nez, J. in Proc.9th International Conference on Permafrost 125\u2013130 (University of Alaska, 2008).48. Brown, R. D. & Brasnett, B. Canadian Meteorological Centre (CMC) DailySnow Depth Analysis Data (NASA National Snow and Ice Data CenterDistributed Active Archive Center, 2010).49. Roesch, A., Wild, M., Gilgen, H. & Ohmura, A. A new snow coverfraction parametrization for the ECHAM4 GCM. Clim. Dynam. 17, 933\u2013946(2001).NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-4 ARTICLENATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:264 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08 240-4| www.nature.com/naturecommunications 9 50. Wise, J. Liquid-in-glass Thermometer Calibration Service (National Inst. ofStandards and Technology - Temperature and Pressure Div., 1988).51. Wood, S. D., Mangum, B. W., Filliben, J. J. & Tillett, S. B. An investigationof the stability of thermistors. J. Res. Natl Bur. Stand. (1934). 83, 247\u2013263(1978).52. Lawton, K. M. & Patterson, S. R. Long-term relative stability of thermistors:Part 2. Precis Eng. 26, 340\u2013345 (2002).53. French, H. M. The Periglacial Environment 3rd edn (John Wiley & Sons. Ltd.,2007).AcknowledgementsThis research would not have been possible without the long-term commitment ofall observers to site maintenance, data collection, and their willingness to sharepermafrost borehole data. All data were compiled by the Global Terrestrial Networkfor Permafrost (GTN-P). We thank the International Permafrost Association for\ufb01nancial support. We thank Jerry Brown for initiating the borehole metadata col-lection and Christina Roolfs for mathematical review. This research was supportedby grants from (in alphabetical order) AGAUR ANTALP #2017-SGR-1102 (Catalo-nia); BMBF PALMOD #01LP1510D (Germany); ERC PETA-CARB #338335 (EU);FCT #PERMANTAR2017-18/PROPOLAR (Portugal); Formas #214-2014-562 (Swe-den); HGF COPER #VH-NG-801 (Germany); Horizon 2020 Nunataryuk #773421(EU); JSPS KAKENHI #25350416, #21310001 (Japan); MESC #RFMEFI58718X0048,#14.587.21.0048-SODEEP (Russia); MeteoSwiss in the framework of GCOS Switzer-land, FOEN and SCNAT for the Swiss Permafrost Monitoring Network PERMOS(Switzerland); Natural Resources Canada; NNSF #41690144, #41671060 (China);NRC TSP #176033/S30, #157837/V30, #176033/S30, #185987/V30 (Norway);NSERC #2014-04084, #2015-05411 (Canada); NSF OPP #1304271, #1304555#1836377; ICER #1558389, #1717770 (USA); PNRA #16_00194 (Italy); Ramon y Cajal#RYC-2015-17597 (Spain); RAS PP #15, #51, #55, GP #AAAA-A18-118022190065-1,#18-218012490093-1 (Russia); RFBR #18-05-60004, #18-55-11003, #16-05-00249,#16-45-890257-YaNAO, #18-55-11005 AF_t(ClimEco), #18-05-60222-Arctica (Rus-sia); RSCF #16-17-00102 (Russia); National Research Foundation, SNA#14070874451 (South Africa).Author contributionsThe study was initially conceived during a GTN-P workshop in 2015. B.K.B. led theanalyses and writing of the manuscript. S.L.S., J.N., H.M., G.V., D.S., P.S., V.E.R. andA.G.L. are principal co-authors. A.A., M.A., J.B., W.L.C., H.H.C., B.D., R.D., D.D., B.E.,G.G., M.G., T.I.-N., K.I., M.I., M.J., D.K., A.K., P.K., H.L., C.L., D.L., G.M., I.M., N.M., M.O., M.P., M.R., A.B.K.S., D.S., C.S., P.S., A.V., Q.W., K.Y. and M.Z. contributed with datacollection and expert assessment of borehole data. H.J., A.J., T.K. and J.-P.L. performeddatabase coding, data processing, and data analyses. All authors contributed to analysis ofthe results and revision of the manuscript.Additional informationSupplementary Information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-4.Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests.Reprints and permission information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/reprintsandpermissions/Journal peer review information: Nature Communications thanks the anonymousreviewers for their contribution to the peer review of this work. Peer reviewer reports areavailable.Publisher\u2019s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims inpublished maps and institutional af\ufb01liations.Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative CommonsAttribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you giveappropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the CreativeCommons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third partymaterial in this article are included in the article\u2019s Creative Commons license, unlessindicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in thearticle\u2019s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutoryregulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly fromthe copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.\u00a9 The Author(s) 2019Boris K. Biskaborn1, Sharon L. Smith2, Jeannette Noetzli3, Heidrun Matthes1, Gon\u00e7alo Vieira4,Dmitry A. Streletskiy5, Philippe Schoeneich6, Vladimir E. Romanovsky7, Antoni G. Lewkowicz8,Andrey Abramov9, Michel Allard10, Julia Boike1,11, William L. Cable1, Hanne H. Christiansen12,Reynald Delaloye13, Bernhard Diekmann1,14, Dmitry Drozdov15, Bernd Etzelm\u00fcller16, Guido Grosse1,14,Mauro Guglielmin17, Thomas Ingeman-Nielsen18, Ketil Isaksen19, Mamoru Ishikawa20,Margareta Johansson21, Halldor Johannsson22, Anseok Joo22, Dmitry Kaverin23, Alexander Kholodov7,9,Pavel Konstantinov24, Tim Kr\u00f6ger25, Christophe Lambiel26, Jean-Pierre Lanckman22, Dongliang Luo27,Galina Malkova15, Ian Meiklejohn28, Natalia Moskalenko15, Marc Oliva29, Marcia Phillips3, Miguel Ramos30,A. Britta K. Sannel31, Dmitrii Sergeev32, Cathy Seybold33, Pavel Skryabin24, Alexander Vasiliev15,34,Qingbai Wu27, Kenji Yoshikawa7, Mikhail Zheleznyak24& Hugues Lantuit1,141Alfred Wegener Institute Helmholtz Centre for Polar and Marine Research, Potsdam 14473, Germany.2Geological Survey of Canada, NaturalResources Canada, Ottawa ON-K1A 0E8, Canada.3WSL Institute for Snow and Avalanche Research SLF, Davos CH-7260, Switzerland.4CEG/IGOT, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon 1600-276, Portugal.5George Washington University, Washington DC 20052, USA.6Institut de G\u00e9ographieAlpine, Grenoble F-38100, France.7University of Alaska Fairbanks, Fairbanks AK-99775, USA.8University of Ottawa, Ottawa K1N 6N5, Canada.9Institute of Physicochemical and Biological Problems of Soil Science, RAS, Moscow 142290, Russia.10Universit\u00e9 Laval, Centre d\u2019\u00e9tudes nordiques,Qu\u00e9bec G1V 0A6, Canada.11Humboldt-Universit\u00e4t, Geography Department, Berlin 10099, Germany.12The University Center in Svalbard,Longyearbyen N-9171, Norway.13University of Fribourg, Fribourg CH-1700, Switzerland.14University of Potsdam, Potsdam 14469, Germany.15EarthCryosphere Institute, Tyumen Scienti\ufb01c Centre SB RAS, Tyumen 625000, Russia.16University of Oslo, Department of Geosciences, Oslo N-0316,Norway.17Insubria University, Department of Theoretical and Applied Sciences, Varese 21100, Italy.18Technical University of Denmark, Departmentof Civil Engineering, Kgs. Lyngby DK-2800, Denmark.19Norwegian Meteorological Institute, Oslo 0313, Norway.20Hokkaido University, Sapporo060-0810, Japan.21Lund University, Lund 22362, Sweden.22Arctic Portal, Akureyri 600, Iceland.23Komi Science Centre, RAS, Syktyvkar 167972,ARTICLE NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-410 NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:264 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08 240-4| www.nature.com/naturecommunications Russia.24Melnikov Permafrost Institute, RAS, Yakutsk 677010, Russia.25Free University Berlin, Geography Department, Berlin 12249, Germany.26University of Lausanne, Lausanne 1015, Switzerland.27Northwest Institute of Eco-environment and Resource, CAS, Lanzhou 730000, China.28Rhodes University, Grahamstown 6140, South Africa.29University of Barcelona, Barcelona 08001, Spain.30Universidad de Alcal\u00e1, Madrid 28801,Spain.31Stockholm University, Stockholm SE-106 91, Sweden.32Institute of Environmental Geoscience, RAS, Moscow 101000, Russia.33NationalSoil Survey Center, Lincoln NE-68508, USA.34Tyumen State University, Tyumen 625003, RussiaNATURE COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08240-4 ARTICLENATURE COMMUNICATIONS | (2019) 10:264 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-08 240-4| www.nature.com/naturecommunications 11 Supplementary resourcesSupplementary MaterialJanuary 2019Boris K. Biskaborn\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0Sharon L. Smith\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0Jeannette Noetzli\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0Heidrun Matthes\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0Hugues LantuitCitations (5)References (51)... Although temporal dynamics of ALT are beyond our analy- ses, our findings suggest that thaw depth and air temperatures are, to a degree, decoupled by local conditions. Recent warming trends in the atmosphere ( Guo et al., 2017) are already very visible in circumpolar permafrost temperature observations ( Romanovsky et al., 2017;Biskaborn et al., 2019), implying that the permafrost system will remain dynamic in the future's changing climate. Warmer air temperatures will occur mostly during winters (AMAP, 2017;Guo et al., 2017), which, given the presented high con- tribution of FDD to MAGT, suggests that changes are fore- seeable. ...... Other climatic factors, however, bear significance. Biskaborn et al. (2019), for example, reported a ground warming in the discontinuous permafrost zone between 2007 and 2016 due to an increase in snow thickness even though no significant change in air temperature during a similar pe- riod occurred. Projected warmer winters can also affect ALT through changing snow conditions and subsequent changes in hydrology and vegetation (Park et al., 2013;Atchley et al., 2016;Peng et al., 2018). ...New insights into the environmental factors controlling the ground thermal regime across the Northern Hemisphere: a comparison between permafrost and non-permafrost areasArticleFull-text availableFeb 2019TC Olli Karjalainen Jan Hjort Miska Luoto Juha AaltoThe thermal state of permafrost affects Earth surface systems and human activity in the Arctic and has implications for global climate. Improved understanding of the local-scale variability in the global ground thermal regime is required to account for its sensitivity to changing climatic and geoecological conditions. Here, we statistically related observations of mean annual ground temperature (MAGT) and active-layer thickness (ALT) to high-resolution (\u223c1 km\u00b2) geospatial data of climatic and local environmental conditions across the Northern Hemisphere. The aim was to characterize the relative importance of key environmental factors and the magnitude and shape of their effects on MAGT and ALT. The multivariate models fitted well to both response variables with average R\u00b2 values being \u223c0.94 and 0.78. Corresponding predictive performances in terms of root-mean-square error were \u223c1.31 \u2218C and 87 cm. Freezing (FDD) and thawing (TDD) degree days were key factors for MAGT inside and outside the permafrost domain with average effect sizes of 6.7 and 13.6 \u2218C, respectively. Soil properties had marginal effects on MAGT (effect size =0.4\u20130.7 \u2218C). For ALT, rainfall (effect size =181 cm) and solar radiation (161 cm) were most influential. Analysis of variable importance further underlined the dominance of climate for MAGT and highlighted the role of solar radiation for ALT. Most response shapes for MAGT \u22640 \u2218C and ALT were non-linear and indicated thresholds for covariation. Most importantly, permafrost temperatures had a more complex relationship with air temperatures than non-frozen ground. Moreover, the observed warming effect of rainfall on MAGT\u22640\u2218C reverted after reaching an optimum at \u223c250 mm, and that of snowfall started to level off at \u223c300\u2013400 mm. It is suggested that the factors of large global variation (i.e. climate) suppressed the effects of local-scale factors (i.e. soil properties and vegetation) owing to the extensive study area and limited representation of soil organic matter. Our new insights into the factors affecting the ground thermal regime at a 1 km scale should improve future hemispheric-scale studies.ViewShow abstract... The temperature range and the water and ice content of the upper soil layer of seasonally freezing and thawing ground (the active layer) determine the biologi- cal and hydrological processes that operate within this layer. Warming of permafrost over the last few decades has been re- ported from many circum-Arctic boreholes ( Biskaborn et al., 2019;Romanovsky et al., 2010). Warming and thawing of permafrost and an overall reduction in the area that it covers have been predicted under future climate change scenarios by the CMIP5 climate models, but at widely varying rates ( Koven et al., 2012;McGuire et al., 2018). ...A 16-year record (2002-2017) of permafrost, active-layer, and meteorological conditions at the Samoylov Island Arctic permafrost research site, Lena River delta, northern Siberia: An opportunity to validate remote-sensing data and land surface, snow, and permafrost modelsArticleFull-text availableFeb 2019 Jan Nitzbon Katharina Anders Lars Kutzbach Julia BoikeMost of the world's permafrost is located in the Arctic, where its frozen organic carbon content makes it a potentially important influence on the global climate system. The Arctic climate appears to be changing more rapidly than the lower latitudes, but observational data density in the region is low. Permafrost thaw and carbon release into the atmosphere, as well as snow cover changes, are positive feedback mechanisms that have the potential for climate warming. It is therefore particularly important to understand the links between the energy balance, which can vary rapidly over hourly to annual timescales, and permafrost conditions, which changes slowly on decadal to centennial timescales. This requires long-term observational data such as that available from the Samoylov research site in northern Siberia, where meteorological parameters, energy balance, and subsurface observations have been recorded since 1998. This paper presents the temporal data set produced between 2002 and 2017, explaining the instrumentation, calibration, processing, and data quality control. Furthermore, we present a merged data set of the parameters, which were measured from 1998 onwards. Additional data include a high-resolution digital terrain model (DTM) obtained from terrestrial lidar laser scanning. Since the data provide observations of temporally variable parameters that influence energy fluxes between permafrost, active-layer soils, and the atmosphere (such as snow depth and soil moisture content), they are suitable for calibrating and quantifying the dynamics of permafrost as a component in earth system models. The data also include soil properties beneath different microtopographic features (a polygon centre, a rim, a slope, and a trough), yielding much-needed information on landscape heterogeneity for use in land surface modelling. For the record from 1998 to 2017, the average mean annual air temperature was \u221212.3 \u2218C, with mean monthly temperature of the warmest month (July) recorded as 9.5 \u2218C and for the coldest month (February) \u221232.7 \u2218C. The average annual rainfall was 169 mm. The depth of zero annual amplitude is at 20.75 m. At this depth, the temperature has increased from \u22129.1 \u2218C in 2006 to \u22127.7 \u2218C in 2017. The presented data are freely available through the PANGAEA (https://doi.org/10.1594/PANGAEA.891142) and Zenodo (https://zenodo.org/record/2223709, last access: 6 February 2019) websites.ViewShow abstract... Ongoing degradation of mountain permafrost 15 coincides with observations of increasing rockfall activity ( Ravanel and Deline, 2011;Huggel et al., 2012;Gobiet et al., 2014) potentially triggering large scale hazard events via complex process chains ( Huggel et al., 2005;Westoby et al., 2014;Haeberli et al., 2017). While the long-term trend of rising permafrost temperatures can be clearly observed at a global scale (Biskaborn et al., 2019) warming trends of mountain permafrost are more diverse in their behavior ( Noetzli et al., 2018). For example 1 Earth Syst. ...A decade of detailed observations (2008\u20132018) in steep bedrock permafrost at Matterhorn H\u00f6rnligrat (Zermatt, CH)ArticleFull-text availableFeb 2019 Reto Da Forno Samuel Weber Mustafa Yuecel Jan BeutelThe PermaSense project is an ongoing interdisciplinary effort between geo-science and engineering disciplines started in 2006 with the goals to make observations possible that previously have not been possible. Specifically the aims are to obtain measurements data in unprecedented quantity and quality based on technological advances. This paper describes a unique ten+ year data record obtained from in-situ measurements in steep bedrock permafrost in an Alpine environment on the Matterhorn H\u00f6rnligrat, Zermatt Switzerland at 3500 m a.s.l. Through the utilization of state-of-the-art wireless sensor technology it was possible to obtain more data of higher quality, make this data available in near real-time and tightly monitor and control the running experiments. This data set (DOI: https://doi.org/10.1594/PANGAEA.897640, Weber et al., 2019a) constitutes the longest, densest and most diverse data record in the history of mountain permafrost research worldwide with 17 different sensor types used at 29 distinct sensor locations consisting of over 114.5 million data points captured over a period of ten+ years. By documenting and sharing this data in this form we contribute to making our past research reproducible and facilitate future research based on this data e.g. in the area of analysis methodology, comparative studies, assessment of change in the environment, natural hazard warning and the development of process models.ViewShow abstract... Permafrost is warming across the globe ( Biskaborn et al., 2019) and within the last two decades upper permafrost temperatures have risen by 0.5-2.0\u00b0C ( Romanovsky et al., 2010). ...Ecosystem carbon response of an Arctic peatland to simulated permafrost thawArticleFull-text availableJan 2019GLOBAL CHANGE BIOL Carolina Voigt Christina Biasi Maija E. Marushchak Mikhail MastepanovPermafrost peatlands are biogeochemical hot spots in the Arctic as they store vast amounts of carbon. Permafrost thaw could release part of these long\u2010term immobile carbon stocks as the greenhouse gases (GHGs) carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4) to the atmosphere, but how much, at which time\u2010span and as which gaseous carbon species is still highly uncertain. Here we assess the effect of permafrost thaw on GHG dynamics under different moisture and vegetation scenarios in a permafrost peatland. A novel experimental approach using intact plant\u2013soil systems (mesocosms) allowed us to simulate permafrost thaw under near\u2010natural conditions. We monitored GHG flux dynamics via high\u2010resolution flow\u2010through gas measurements, combined with detailed monitoring of soil GHG concentration dynamics, yielding insights into GHG production and consumption potential of individual soil layers. Thawing the upper 10\u201315cm of permafrost under dry conditions increased CO2 emissions to the atmosphere (without vegetation: 0.74\u00b10.49 vs. 0.84\u00b10.60g CO2\u2013C m\u22122d\u22121; with vegetation: 1.20\u00b10.50 vs. 1.32\u00b10.60g CO2\u2013C m\u22122d\u22121, mean\u00b1SD, pre\u2010 and post\u2010thaw, respectively). Radiocarbon dating (14C) of respired CO2, supported by an independent curve fitting approach, showed a clear contribution (9\u201327%) of old carbon to this enhanced post\u2010thaw CO2 flux. Elevated concentrations of CO2, CH4, and dissolved organic carbon at depth indicated not just pulse emissions during the thawing process, but sustained decomposition and GHG production from thawed permafrost. Oxidation of CH4 in the peat column, however, prevented CH4 release to the atmosphere. Importantly, we show here that, under dry conditions, peatlands strengthen the permafrost\u2013carbon feedback by adding to the atmospheric CO2 burden post\u2010thaw. However, as long as the water table remains low, our results reveal a strong CH4 sink capacity in these types of Arctic ecosystems pre\u2010 and post\u2010thaw, with the potential to compensate part of the permafrost CO2 losses over longer timescales. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.ViewShow abstract... Warming of permafrost over the last few decades has been reported from many circum-Arctic boreholes ( Biskaborn et al., 2018;Romanovsky et al., 2010). Warming and thawing of perma- 60 frost and an overall reduction in the area that it covers have been predicted under future climate change scenarios by the CMIP5 climate models, but at widely varying rates ( Koven et al., 2012;McGuire et al., 2018). ...A 16-year record (2002\u20132017) of permafrost, active layer, and meteorological conditions at the Samoylov Island Arctic permafrost research site, Lena River Delta, northern Siberia: an opportunity to validate remote sensing data and land surface, snow, and permafrost modelsArticleFull-text availableJul 2018 Jan Nitzbon Katharina Anders Lars Kutzbach Julia BoikeMost of the world's permafrost is located in the Arctic, where its frozen organic carbon con-tent makes it a potentially important influence on the global climate system. The Arctic climate appears to be changing more rapidly than the lower latitudes, but observational data density in the region is low. Permafrost thaw and carbon release into the atmosphere is a positive feed-back mechanism that has the potential for climate warming. It is therefore particularly im-portant to understand the links between the energy balance, which can vary rapidly over hour-ly to annual time scales, and permafrost condition, which changes slowly on decadal to cen-tennial timescales. This requires long-term observational data such as that available from the Samoylov research site in northern Siberia, where meteorological parameters, energy balance, and subsurface observations have been recorded since 1998. This paper presents the temporal data set produced between 2002 and 2017, explaining the instrumentation, calibration, pro-cessing and data quality control. Additional data include a high-resolution digital terrain mod-el (DTM) obtained from terrestrial LiDAR laser scanning. Since the data provide observations of temporally variable parameters that influence energy fluxes between permafrost, active lay-er soils, and the atmosphere (such as snow depth and soil moisture content), they are suitable for calibrating and quantifying the dynamics of permafrost as a component in earth system models. The data also include soil properties beneath different microtopographic features (a polygon center, a rim, a slope, and a trough), yielding much-needed information on landscape heterogeneity for use in land surface modeling. For the record from 1998 to 2017, the average mean annual air temperature was \u221212.3\u00b0C, with mean monthly temperature of the warmest month (July) recorded as 9.5\u00b0C and for the coldest month (February) \u221232.7\u00b0C. The average annual rainfall was 169mm. The depth of zero annual amplitude niveau is at 20.8m, and has warmed from \u22129.1\u00b0C in 2006 to \u22127.7\u00b0C in 2017. The presented data are available in the supplementary material of this paper and through the PANGAEA website (https://doi.org/10.1594/PANGAEA.891142).ViewShow abstractDegrading permafrost puts Arctic infrastructure at risk by mid-centuryArticleFull-text availableDec 2018 Olli Karjalainen Jan Hjort Miska Luoto Juha AaltoDegradation of near-surface permafrost can pose a serious threat to the utilization of natural resources, and to the sustainable development of Arctic communities. Here we identify at unprecedentedly high spatial resolution infrastructure hazard areas in the Northern Hemi- sphere\u2019s permafrost regions under projected climatic changes and quantify fundamental engineering structures at risk by 2050. We show that nearly four million people and 70% of current infrastructure in the permafrost domain are in areas with high potential for thaw of near-surface permafrost. Our results demonstrate that one-third of pan-Arctic infrastructure and 45% of the hydrocarbon extraction \ufb01elds in the Russian Arctic are in regions where thaw-related ground instability can cause severe damage to the built environment. Alarmingly, these \ufb01gures are not reduced substantially even if the climate change targets of the Paris Agreement are reached.ViewShow abstractRecently amplified arctic warming has contributed to a continual global warming trendArticleFull-text availableNov 2017Nat. Clim. Change. Qiyi Zhang Jiansong Zhang Xiangdong Zhang Jianbin HuangThe existence and magnitude of the recently suggested global warming hiatus, or slowdown, have been strongly debated1\u20133. Although various physical processes4\u20138 have been examined to elucidate this phenomenon, the accuracy and completeness of observational data that comprise global average surface air temperature (SAT) datasets is a concern9,10. In particular, these datasets lack either complete geographic coverage or in situ observations over the Arctic, owing to the sparse observational network in this area\u2079. As a consequence, the contribution of Arctic warming to global SAT changes may have been underestimated, leading to an uncertainty in the hiatus debate. Here, we constructed a new Arctic SAT dataset using the most recently updated global SATs\u00b2 and a drifting buoys based Arctic SAT dataset\u00b9\u00b9 through employing the \u2018data interpolating empirical orthogonal functions\u2019 method\u00b9\u00b2. Our estimate of global SAT rate of increase is around 0.112 \u00b0C per decade, instead of 0.05 \u00b0C per decade from IPCC AR5\u00b9, for 1998\u20132012. Analysis of this dataset shows that the amplified Arctic warming over the past decade has significantly contributed to a continual global warming trend, rather than a hiatus or slowdown.ViewShow abstractStrategy and Implementation Plan 2016-2020 for the Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost (GTN-P).Technical ReportFull-text availableNov 2017 Sharon L. Smith Boris K Biskaborn Dmitry A Streletskiy Philippe SchoeneichPermafrost is recognized as Essential Climate Variable (ECV) within the Global Climate Observing System of UN and ICSU organisations. The Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost (GTN-P) is the primary international programme concerned with long-term monitoring of permafrost. The core mission of the GTN-P is sustained comprehensive long-term monitoring network, in order to provide consistent, representative and high quality standardized long-term data series of selected permafrost parameters at key sites and to assess their state and changes over time. The Strategy and Implementation Plan 2016-2020 outlines recent progress and future challenges facing the network. It describes the governance and management structure of GTN-P, linkages to regional and global observing systems, management process and reporting strategies. It presents measurement methods and protocols used in field data collection and state of the art data management system, which was recently designed and implemented to process, analyse, and visualize permafrost data. It concludes with the outlook of the future developments of the network in order to sustain and succeed its core mission of providing long-term observations and maintain the availability of data collected.ViewShow abstractPermafrost Thermal StateArticleFull-text availableAug 2017B AM METEOROL SOC Lin Zhao Jeannette Noetzli Boris K Biskaborn Dmitry A StreletskiyViewLess Than 2 \u00b0C Warming by 2100 UnlikelyArticleJul 2017Nat. Clim. Change. Alec Zimmer Peiran Liu Dargan M. W. Frierson Adrian E. RafteryThe recently published Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) projections to 2100 give likely ranges of global temperature increase in four scenarios for population, economic growth and carbon use. However, these projections are not based on a fully statistical approach. Here we use a country-specific version of Kaya's identity to develop a statistically based probabilistic forecast of CO 2 emissions and temperature change to 2100. Using data for 1960-2010, including the UN's probabilistic population projections for all countries, we develop a joint Bayesian hierarchical model for Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per capita and carbon intensity. We find that the 90% interval for cumulative CO 2 emissions includes the IPCC's two middle scenarios but not the extreme ones. The likely range of global temperature increase is 2.0-4.9 \u00b0C, with median 3.2 \u00b0C and a 5% (1%) chance that it will be less than 2 \u00b0C (1.5 \u00b0C). Population growth is not a major contributing factor. Our model is not a business as usual' scenario, but rather is based on data which already show the effect of emission mitigation policies. Achieving the goal of less than 1.5 \u00b0C warming will require carbon intensity to decline much faster than in the recent past.ViewShow abstractR: A Language and Environment for Statistical ComputingBookJan 2011 Development Core R TeamViewAn observation-based constraint on permafrost loss as a function of global warmingArticleApr 2017Nat. Clim. Change. Sebastian Westermann Sarah Chadburn Peter M. Cox Eleanor J. BurkePermafrost, which covers 15 million km 2 of the land surface, is one of the components of the Earth system that is most sensitive to warming. Loss of permafrost would radically change high-latitude hydrology and biogeochemical cycling, and could therefore provide very significant feedbacks on climate change. The latest climate models all predict warming of high-latitude soils and thus thawing of permafrost under future climate change, but with widely varying magnitudes of permafrost thaw. Here we show that in each of the models, their present-day spatial distribution of permafrost and air temperature can be used to infer the sensitivity of permafrost to future global warming. Using the same approach for the observed permafrost distribution and air temperature, we estimate a sensitivity of permafrost area loss to global mean warming at stabilization of million km 2 \u00b0C \u00e2 '1 (1\u03c3 confidence), which is around 20% higher than previous studies. Our method facilitates an assessment for COP21 climate change targets: if the climate is stabilized at 2 \u00b0C above pre-industrial levels, we estimate that the permafrost area would eventually be reduced by over 40%. Stabilizing at 1.5 \u00b0C rather than 2 \u00b0C would save approximately 2 million km 2 of permafrost. \u00a9 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.ViewShow abstractRecent regional climate cooling on the Antarctic Peninsula and associated impacts on the cryosphereArticleDec 2016SCI TOTAL ENVIRON Francisco Navarro Filip Hrbacek Marc Oliva Ricardo M TrigoViewDerivation and analysis of a high-resolution estimate of global permafrost zonationArticleFull-text availableFeb 2012TC Stephan GruberPermafrost underlies much of Earth's surface and interacts with climate, eco-systems and human systems. It is a complex phenomenon controlled by climate and (sub-) surface properties and reacts to change with variable delay. Heterogeneity and sparse data challenge the modeling of its spatial distribution. Currently, there is no data set to adequately inform global studies of permafrost. The available data set for the Northern Hemisphere is frequently used for model evaluation, but its quality and consistency are difficult to assess. Here, a global model of permafrost extent and dataset of permafrost zonation are presented and discussed, extending earlier studies by including the Southern Hemisphere, by consistent data and methods, by attention to uncertainty and scaling. Established relationships between air temperature and the occurrence of permafrost are re-formulated into a model that is parametrized using published estimates. It is run with a high-resolution (<1 km) global elevation data and air temperatures based on the NCAR-NCEP reanalysis and CRU TS 2.0. The resulting data provide more spatial detail and a consistent extrapolation to remote regions, while aggregated values resemble previous studies. The estimated uncertainties affect regional patterns and aggregate number, and provide interesting insight. The permafrost area, i.e. the actual surface area underlain by permafrost, north of 60\u00b0 S is estimated to be 13\u201318 \u00d7 10<sup>6</sup> km<sup>2</sup> or 9\u201314 % of the exposed land surface. The global permafrost area including Antarctic and sub-sea permafrost is estimated to be 16\u201321 \u00d7 10<sup>6</sup> km<sup>2</sup>. The global permafrost region, i.e. the exposed land surface below which some permafrost can be expected, is estimated to be 22 \u00b1 3 \u00d7 10<sup>6</sup> km<sup>2</sup>. A large proportion of this exhibits considerable topography and spatially-discontinuous permafrost, underscoring the importance of attention to scaling issues and heterogeneity in large-area models.ViewShow abstractGreater effect of increasing shrub height on winter versus summer soil temperatureArticleFull-text availableAug 2016ENVIRON RES LETT M\u00e9lissa Paradis Esther L\u00e9vesque St\u00e9phane BoudreauShrub expansion is increasingly observed in arctic and subarctic environments. The development of shrub structure may significantly impact the abiotic environment at the local scale. Our objective was to reconstruct the development of the vertical structure of Betula glandulosa Michx. and to evaluate its effects on winter and summer soil temperature and on snow depth. Stratified sampling of the shrub revealed that shrub biomass distribution followed a similar pattern in stands of contrasting heights. Woody biomass was maximal in the lower stratum and relatively stable in the intermediate strata, while the foliar biomass tracked the vertical development of the shrub structure. Dendrochronological analysis revealed that shrub stands are relatively young; most of the dominant stems started their development after 1990. Shrub height was positively associated with both the dominant stem age and its vertical growth rate. Temperature differences among sites were greater during winter (ca 10 \u00b0C) than during summer (ca 2 \u00b0C), while the sum of freezing degree-days varied from 680 \u00b0C to 2125 \u00b0C. Shrub height was the most plausible variable explaining snow depth, winter ground level temperature and the sum of freezing degree-days. However, woody biomass in the 30\u201340 cm strata best explained summer ground level temperature. Our results suggest that the development of a shrub structure will have far-reaching consequences on the abiotic environment of subarctic ecosystems.ViewShow abstractShow moreAdJoin ResearchGate to find the people and research you need to help your work.15+ million members118+ million publications700k+ research projectsJoin for freeRecommendationsDiscover more publications, questions and projects in PermafrostProjectLandscape Processes in Antarctic Ecosystems Ian MeiklejohnView projectProjectMonitoring and Assessment of the Arctic L. O. Reiersen Simon J. Wilson Roland Kallenborn[...] John WalshView projectProjectcheck with Terry Callaghan, who employed me Fredrik Bergholm Terry V Callaghan Margareta Johansson[...] Torben R\u00f8jle ChristensenView projectProjectTHE BRIDGE BUILDER EXPEDITIONS | SPITSBERGEN (SVALBARD). Lars Hansen Arne Ardeberg Jonas Hagstr\u00f6m[...] Fridtjof MehlumBACKGROUND: The BRIDGE BUILDER EXPEDITIONS are the overarching definition for a series of contemporary and scientifically sustainable projects established by The IK Foundation, an undertaking whic h aims to inspire and contribute to understanding of our shared planet! These projects are grounded in the concepts of retracing and lifting both practical and theoretical knowledge from the Linnaeus Apostles' journeys. FORLANDS\u00d8YANE, SPITSBERGEN (SVALBARD): Forlands\u00f8yane consist of three small islands \u2013 Nord\u00f8ya, Midt\u00f8ya and S\u00f8r\u00f8ya \u2013 close to the west coast of Prins Karls Forland, Spitsbergen, Svalbard which are highly interesting and important from many points of view. Still, investigation of these islands have been rather limited not at least due to the highly vulnerable situation of the islands from the Greenland Sea and the difficulty of landing along the exposed coast. Although the islands have been known to seafarers for centuries, as a sheltered natural harbour and \"a living pantry\" for collecting of bird eggs and hunting fields of birds and seals. But also a place for collecting the valuable and insulating down from nesting eiders. Further, during the latest century, environmental and other protection of their precious nature, flora and fauna as well as their cultural heritage has been very well conducted. The first known and documented scientific investigation of Forlands\u00f8yane took place on the first of July, 1758. Then, Anton Rolandsson Martin, one of the Linnaeus Apostles, managed to get ashore and study the landscape at the Forlands\u00f8yane islands. For the purpose of scientific studies of the climate, fauna and flora of Spitsbergen, he was a guest naturalist aboard a whaling ship. While able to stay on this location for a few hours only, Anton Rolandsson Martin, scientifically trained by Carl Linnaeus and highly motivated, used the time available in a very determined manner. In addition to writing a thorough description of the landscape, size and form of the island, climate, fauna and flora, he selected a small but significant rock sample for further studies at home. This sample was documented, studied and classified by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences. It is noted that the same Academy had provided important funding for his Spitsbergen research endeavour. Inspired by the pioneer investigations of Anton Rolandsson Martin, The IK Foundation arranged, in September 2016 (Voyage I) a research expedition to Spitsbergen and, not at least to the largest of the three islands, Midt\u00f8ya. The expedition was part of The IK Foundation\u2019s global BRIDGE BUILDER EXPEDITIONS programme. Just as Anton Rolandsson Martin in 1758, the members of the 2016 expedition studied the west coast of Spitsbergen concerning climate, glaciers, flora and fauna as well as its impressively well-preserved cultural heritage. At the same time, the expedition, guided by Anton Rolandsson Martin\u2019s diary, succeeded in confirming Forlands\u00f8yane as the islands visited and studied by him. His diary was additionally first published in English by the IK Foundation in 2007 \u2013 The Linnaeus Apostles Global Science & Adventure (Volume Two, Book One), together with his Talk On Norwegian Housekeeping based on his observations from a journey to Norway in 1759-1760. More information on Anton Rolandsson Martin as a person and his work can be found in iFACTS and iMAPS. During Voyage II a year later (2017), the expedition visited Forlands\u00f8yane for further documentation and studies, in particular visits to the second largest island, Nord\u00f8ya and the nearest coast of Prins Karls Forland. READ MORE > https://www.ikfoundation.org/ilinnaeus/iprojects/spitsbergen.php ... [more]View projectArticleFull-text availableThe new database of the Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost (GTN-P)September 2015 \u00b7 Earth System Science DataJ.-P. Lanckman Boris K Biskaborn Hugues Lantuit[...] Vladimir E RomanovskyThe Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost (GTN-P) provides the first dynamic database associated with the Thermal State of Permafrost (TSP) and the Circumpolar Active Layer Monitoring (CALM) programs, which extensively collect permafrost temperature and active layer thickness (ALT) data from Arctic, Antarctic and mountain permafrost regions. The purpose of GTN-P is to establish an early ... [Show full abstract] warning system for the consequences of climate change in permafrost regions and to provide standardized thermal permafrost data to global models. In this paper we introduce the GTN-P database and perform statistical analysis of the GTN-P metadata to identify and quantify the spatial gaps in the site distribution in relation to climate-effective environmental parameters. We describe the concept and structure of the data management system in regard to user operability, data transfer and data policy. We outline data sources and data processing including quality control strategies based on national correspondents. Assessment of the metadata and data quality reveals 63 % metadata completeness at active layer sites and 50 % metadata completeness for boreholes. Voronoi tessellation analysis on the spatial sample distribution of boreholes and active layer measurement sites quantifies the distribution inhomogeneity and provides a potential method to locate additional permafrost research sites by improving the representativeness of thermal monitoring across areas underlain by permafrost. The depth distribution of the boreholes reveals that 73 % are shallower than 25 m and 27 % are deeper, reaching a maximum of 1 km depth. Comparison of the GTN-P site distribution with permafrost zones, soil organic carbon contents and vegetation types exhibits different local to regional monitoring situations, which are illustrated with maps. Preferential slope orientation at the sites most likely causes a bias in the temperature monitoring and should be taken into account when using the data for global models. The distribution of GTN-P sites within zones of projected temperature change show a high representation of areas with smaller expected temperature rise but a lower number of sites within Arctic areas where climate models project extreme temperature increase.View full-textArticleFull-text availableThe Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost Database: metadata statistics and prospective analysis...March 2015J.-P. Lanckman Boris K Biskaborn Hugues Lantuit[...] Vladimir E RomanovskyThe Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost (GTN-P) provides the first dynamic database associated with the Thermal State of Permafrost (TSP) and the Circumpolar Active Layer Monitoring (CALM) programs, which extensively collect permafrost temperature and active layer thickness data from Arctic, Antarctic and Mountain permafrost regions. The purpose of the database is to establish an \"early ... [Show full abstract] warning system\" for the consequences of climate change in permafrost regions and to provide standardized thermal permafrost data to global models. In this paper we perform statistical analysis of the GTN-P metadata aiming to identify the spatial gaps in the GTN-P site distribution in relation to climate-effective environmental parameters. We describe the concept and structure of the Data Management System in regard to user operability, data transfer and data policy. We outline data sources and data processing including quality control strategies. Assessment of the metadata and data quality reveals 63% metadata completeness at active layer sites and 50% metadata completeness for boreholes. Voronoi Tessellation Analysis on the spatial sample distribution of boreholes and active layer measurement sites quantifies the distribution inhomogeneity and provides potential locations of additional permafrost research sites to improve the representativeness of thermal monitoring across areas underlain by permafrost. The depth distribution of the boreholes reveals that 73% are shallower than 25 m and 27% are deeper, reaching a maximum of 1 km depth. Comparison of the GTN-P site distribution with permafrost zones, soil organic carbon contents and vegetation types exhibits different local to regional monitoring situations on maps. Preferential slope orientation at the sites most likely causes a bias in the temperature monitoring and should be taken into account when using the data for global models. The distribution of GTN-P sites within zones of projected temperature change show a high representation of areas with smaller expected temperature rise but a lower number of sites within arctic areas were climate models project extreme temperature increase. This paper offers a scientific basis for planning future permafrost research sites on large scales.View full-textChapterFull-text availableKnowledge Transfer by the Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost (GTN-P)March 2018 Boris K Biskaborn Hugues LantuitPermafrost ecosystems occupy a quarter of the land surface in the Northern Hemisphere. Ongoing rapid temperature change in these areas causes permafrost warming in the Arctic and thawing in the Subarctic regions (Romanovsky et al. Permafr Periglac Process 21:106\u2013116 2010). View full-textArticleFull-text availablePermafrost degradation on a warmer Earth: Challenges and perspectivesMarch 2018 Michael Fritz Marc OlivaPermafrost, the permanently frozen ground, is warming due to global temperature rise. Permafrost research has progressed rapidly in the last decade, as large areas in the Polar Regions, in mountain environments and on high-altitude plateaus are experiencing accelerated environmental changes in response to thaw and permafrost degradation. Climate scenarios for the next decades project a reduced ... [Show full abstract] the extent of permafrost coverage and increasing ground temperatures, promoting changes in terrestrial and nearshore ecosystem dynamics. Future research in permafrost regions should focus on a better understanding of the biogeochemical cycles associated with abrupt and long-term permafrost degradation. Risk assessment of natural hazards and geoenvironmental engineering solutions are needed to reduce the potential dramatic socio-economic implications that permafrost degradation may entail in these regions.View full-textDiscover moreLast Updated: 06 Mar 2019Download citationWhat type of file do you want? RIS BibTeX Plain TextWhat do you want to download? Citation only Citation and abstractDownloadInterested in research on Permafrost?Join ResearchGate to discover and stay up-to-date with the latest research from leading experts in Permafrost and many other scientific topics.Join for freeorDiscover by subject areaRecruit researchersJoin for freeLoginEmail Tip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inor log in withWelcome back! Please log in.Email \u00b7 HintTip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inor log in withNo account? Sign upAboutNewsCompanyCareersSupportHelp centerFAQBusiness solutionsRecruitingAdvertisingAd\u00a9 ResearchGate 2019. All rights reserved.ImprintTermsPrivacy", "Permafrost - AMS Glossary Permafrost From AMS Glossary Jump to: navigation, search permafrost (Also called perennially frozen ground, pergelisol, permanently frozen ground.) A layer of soil or bedrock at a variable depth beneath the surface of the earth in which the temperature has been below freezing continuously from a few to several thousands of years. Permafrost exists where the summer heating fails to descend to the base of the layer of frozen ground. A continuous stratum of permafrost is found where the annual mean temperature is below about -5\u00b0C (23\u00b0F).Compare pereletok; see active layer. As limited in application by P. F. Svetsov, soil that is known to have been frozen for at least a century. Muller, S. W. 1947. Permafrost, or Permanently Frozen Ground, and Related Engineering Problems. Hare, F. K. 1951. Compendium of Meteorology. p. 958, and map, p. 956. Retrieved from \"http://glossary.ametsoc.org/w/index.php?title=Permafrost&oldid=17555\" Categories: TermTerms P Personal tools Log in Namespaces Page Discussion Variants SEARCH ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ Navigation Main page Glossary History Modify or suggest a term Random Term Help AMS Publications Toolbox What links here Related changes Special pages Printable version Permanent link This page was last modified on 25 April 2012, at 18:35. This page has been accessed 7,027 times. \u00a9 2019 American Meteorological Society Contact Us Mobile", "Permafrost | Define Permafrost at Dictionary.com Dictionary.comThesaurus.comEverything After ZWord of the DayVideoWord FactsGrammarCrossword SolverDaily CrosswordAll The WordsSlangEmojiGender & SexualityAcronymsDictionary.comThesaurus.comTry Our AppsdefinitionsSearchsynonymspermafrost[pur-muh-frawst, -frost]EXAMPLES|WORD ORIGINSEE MORE SYNONYMS FOR permafrost ON THESAURUS.COMnoun(in arctic or subarctic regions) perennially frozen subsoil.Explore Dictionary.comWhy Do Some People Gesticulate So Much?Emoji Challenge: Can You Translate More Emoji Into English?These Are the Longest Words in EnglishThese Are the Saddest Phrases in EnglishOrigin of permafrostFirst recorded in 1943; perma(nent) + frostAlso called pergelisol.Dictionary.com Unabridged Based on the Random House Unabridged Dictionary, \u00a9 Random House, Inc. 2019Related Words for permafrostchunk, glaze, hail, crystal, iceberg, icicle, glacier, sleet, diamonds, hailstone, floeExamples from the Web for permafrostContemporary Examples of permafrostI wondered what would happen to the trees if some of the permafrost melted, allowing roots to expand in longer growing seasons.Visiting the Arctic Circle\u2026Before It\u2019s Irreversibly ChangedTerry Greene SterlingApril 1, 2014British Dictionary definitions for permafrostpermafrostnounground that is permanently frozen, often to great depths, the surface sometimes thawing in the summerShow MoreWord Origin for permafrostC20: from perma (nent) + frostCollins English Dictionary - Complete & Unabridged 2012 Digital Edition \u00a9 William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd. 1979, 1986 \u00a9 HarperCollins Publishers 1998, 2000, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2012Word Origin and History for permafrostn.1943, coined in English by Russian-born U.S. geologist Siemon W. Muller (1900-1970) from perm(anent) frost.Show MoreOnline Etymology Dictionary, \u00a9 2010 Douglas Harperpermafrost in Sciencepermafrost[p\u00fbr\u2032m\u0259-fr\u00f4st\u2032]A layer of soil or bedrock that has been continuously frozen for at least two years and as long as tens of thousands of years. Permafrost can reach depths of up to 1,524 m (4,999 ft). It is found throughout most of the polar regions and underlies about one fifth of the Earth's land surface.Show MoreThe American Heritage\u00ae Science Dictionary Copyright \u00a9 2011. Published by Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company. All rights reserved.Others Are ReadingWhat Does Gender Really Mean?The Year's Top Word TrendsWord of the DayreginaUsing These Words Will Make You Sound Like You're From New YorkDictionary.com's Top 10 Grammar TipsNearby words for permafrostperma-perma-pressperma-tanpermaculturepermadeathpermafrostpermafrost tablepermalinkpermalloypermanencepermanencyBrowse the Dictionary:#ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZBrowse by Category:SlangEmojiAcronymsPop CultureMoreAboutCareersContact UsCookies, Terms, & Privacy\u00a9 2019 Dictionary.com, LLC", "Table of contents for Frozen in time Table of contents for Frozen in time : permafrost and engineering problems / edited by Hugh M. French, Frederick E. Nelson ; sponsored by Technical Committee on Cold Regions Engineering. Bibliographic record and links to related information available from the Library of Congress catalog. Note: Contents data are machine generated based on pre-publication provided by the publisher. Contents may have variations from the printed book or be incomplete or contain other coding. table of contents List of Figures...................................................................................................xxxi List of Tables...................................................................................................xxxix Part 1: introduction ...................................................................................... 1 Definition of Permafrost ........................................................................................ 1 History of Investigation ......................................................................................... 5 Terminology......................................................................................................... 13 Part 2: permafrost science ....................................................................... 23 Origin of Permafrost ............................................................................................ 23 Geography of Permafrost..................................................................................... 27 Vertical Extent and Temperature of Permafrost................................................... 32 Ground Ice ........................................................................................................... 33 Permafrost Landscapes ........................................................................................ 47 Vegetation ............................................................................................................ 58 Physical Properties of Frozen Ground ................................................................. 66 Part 3: permafrost and engineering problems.................................. 81 Logistics............................................................................................................... 81 Investigation of Permafrost for Engineering Problems ....................................... 85 Excavation of Frozen Ground............................................................................ 101 Drilling Methods in Frozen Ground .................................................................. 108 Roads and Railroads .......................................................................................... 114 Runways............................................................................................................. 137 Bridges............................................................................................................... 145 Dams and Reservoirs ......................................................................................... 150 Mining................................................................................................................ 151 Buildings............................................................................................................ 157 Water Supply...................................................................................................... 178 Utilities and Sanitation....................................................................................... 200 Materials ............................................................................................................ 204 Miscellaneous Engineering Problems................................................................ 207 References ..................................................................................................... 209 Appendix 1. Select Bibliography .................................................................... 217 Appendix 2. Glossary of Permafrost Terms.................................................... 249 Appendix 3. Key to Glossary sources............................................................. 269 Index................................................................................................................. 273 Xxix Library of Congress Subject Headings for this publication: Frozen ground. Civil engineering -- Cold weather conditions. Building -- Cold weather conditions.", "How rapidly is permafrost changing - Romanovsky National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration United States Department of Commerce \u2261 Home PMEL Home Arctic Zone Home Arctic Change Home About Arctic Zone Research About Climate Climate Dynamics Arctic Heat Sea Ice Studies Arctic Rediscovery Publications Atmospheric Chemistry Ecosystems EcoFOCI Carbon DBO SOAR ITAE RUSALCA Technology Partners Acoustics Atmospheric Chemistry Communication YouTube Arctic Report Card Bering Climate Arctic Rediscovery First International Polar Year Everything Arctic FAQ Key Arctic Topics General Interest Animals Archaeology & Native Peoples Arctic Change Indicators Barents Sea Region Bering Sea Climate Education Environment/Pollution Exploration Maps News Links North Pacific Ocean Northern Lights Ships Scientific Arctic Change Indicators Climate Indices Data Data Centers Institutions & Organizations Maps Research Programs International Polar Years North Pole North Pole Web Cam Daylight/Darkness at the North Pole North Pole Environment North Pole Weather Data North Pole Videos Arctic Today Research News Annual Report Card Report Card Videos Arctic Change Detection Sea Ice Prediction Network Arctic Sea Ice News Mid-Latitude Linkages Arctic Past International Polar Years First International Polar Year Arctic Rediscovery Arctic Exploration Photos North Pole Web Cam Arctic Images RUSALCA Photos First International Polar Year Photos YouTube Videos How rapidly is permafrost changing and what are the impacts of these changes? Vladimir E. Romanovsky Associate Professor Geophysical Institute UAF Fairbanks, AK Figure 1. One of the hot afternoons in Fairbanks, Alaska in June 2004. What is permafrost? On a hot day in Fairbanks, Alaska (Figure 1), it is very hard to imagine that anything could be frozen around here. The sun is shining almost around the clock, the trees and grass are green and people try to find some good spot near the water, which is not spoiled by a myriad of mosquitoes. Yet, in less than 100 yards from the University of Alaska Fairbanks corner, within a large area covered by tiny black spruce trees and a thick moss layer, the soil is frozen just some 30 to 40 centimeters below the moss surface. This soil will be frozen during the entire summer. No big surprise, it was frozen for the last several thousand years and maybe even longer. That is why we call this natural phenomena \"permafrost\", or \"perennially frozen ground\". Only the upper 30 to 100 cm of soils (called the active layer) thaws every summer and then completely refreezes during the winter. Typical thickness of permafrost around Fairbanks is about 50 meters, but varies between a few meters and 150 m and more. Figure 2. Wintertime in Fairbanks, Alaska. Why does permafrost still exist in Fairbanks with such warm summers? Because the average temperature during the year is the most important factor for permafrost existence. Winters in Fairbanks are cold and long (Figure 2). So, the average air temperatures here are typically between -2 and -5\u00b0C. The insulating effect of snow makes the average temperatures in permafrost higher (typically from -0.2 to -2\u00b0C) that brings permafrost in Fairbanks area to the edge of instability (long-term thawing). Permafrost gets colder and thicker northward. Within the northern foothills of the Brooks Range permafrost is already -2 to -5\u00b0C cold and about 200 meters thick. On the Alaskan Arctic Plain, permafrost could be as cold as -9 to -11\u00b0C cold and up to 650 meters thick. The large observed and predicted future climatic changes will inevitably change the energy and mass fluxes at the land surface and, as a result, the near-surface and subsurface physical conditions in the Arctic and Sub-Arctic. This will trigger changes in ecosystems and infrastructure because the stability of these systems in the north relies on the stability of ice that, so far, holds these systems together. In losing permafrost, we are losing the stability of systems. What is happening to permafrost? The long-term records of the near-surface permafrost temperature, obtained from different parts of the permafrost zone in northern regions, show a significant warming trend during the last 30 years (Table 1). Ground temperature trends generally follow the trends in the air temperatures with a more pronounced warming in the lower latitudes (between 55\u00b0 and 65\u00b0 North). This recent climate warming brought soil temperatures to a surprisingly high level, about 1 to 3\u00b0C warmer than long-term averages (Figure 3). Within some areas, the permafrost temperatures are very close to 0\u00b0C (Figure 4) and at some sites long-term permafrost degradation has already started (Fedorov, 1996; Osterkamp et al., 2000; Jorgenson et al., 2001; Fedorov and Konstantinov, 2003; Gavriliev and Efremov, 2003). Figure 3. Measured (1995-2003) and calculated (1930-1995) averaged over the year soil temperatures in Fairbanks, Alaska area. Figure 4. Mean annual air and ground (at 1.6 m depth) temperatures in East Siberia at the Tongulakh meteorological station (60.7\u00b0N, 114.9\u00b0E). Threshold at 0\u00baC is outlined. Data were obtained from the Monthly Climate Bulletin (Klimatologicheskii spravochnik..., 1961-1992). Figure 5. Extremely ice-rich permafrost (so called \"Ice Complex\") at the Duvaniy Yar site on the Kolyma River, East Siberia (photo by S. Davidov). If recent trends continue, it will take several centuries to millennia for permafrost to disappear completely in the areas where it is now actively warming and thawing. However, negative consequences of this degradation will be pronounced from the very beginning because the highest ice content in permafrost usually is found in the upper few tens of meters (Figure 5). What happens when permafrost starts to thaw? While the increase in permafrost temperatures may change many of its physical properties that can have some negative effects on infrastructure, the major threshold occurs when permafrost starts to thaw from its top down. At that moment, many processes (some of them very destructive) will be triggered or intensified. The most significant impacts on ecosystems, infrastructure, carbon cycle and hydrology will be observed in areas where permafrost contains a considerable amount of ground ice in the upper few meters. Even in the polar areas, where permafrost will still be stable, the depth of the seasonal active layer will increase significantly if present trends continue. Table 1 Recent trends in permafrost temperatures measured at different locations (modified from Romanovsky et al., 2002) Country Region Permafrost temperature change/trends Reference USA Trans-Alaska pipeline route (20 m), 1983-2003 +0.6 to +1.5\u00b0C Osterkamp and Romanovsky, 1999; Romanovsky and Osterkamp, 2001; Osterkamp 2003 Barrow Permafrost Observatory (15 m), 1950-2003 +1\u00b0C Brewer 1958; Romanovsky et al., 2002 Russia East Siberia (1.6-3.2 m), 1960-1992 +0.03\u00b0C/year Romanovsky et al., 2001 North of West Siberia (10 m), 1980-1990 +0.3 to +0.7\u00b0C Pavlov, 1994 European North of Russia, continuous permafrost zone (6 m), 1973-1992 +1.6 to +2.8\u00b0C Pavlov, 1994 European North of Russia, discontinuous permafrost zone (6 m), 1970-1995 up to +1.2\u00b0C Oberman and Mazhitova, 2001 Canada Alert (15 m), 1995-2000 +0.15\u00b0C/year Geological Survey of Canada data: Smith et al., 2003 Northern Mackenzie basin (28 m), 1990-2000 +0.1\u00b0C/year Geological Survey of Canada data: Couture et al. (2003) Central Mackenzie basin (15 m), 1985-2000 +0.03\u00b0C/year Geological Survey of Canada data: Couture et al. (2003) Northern Quebec (10 m), late 1980s - mid 1990s -0.1\u00b0C/year Allard et al., 1995 Europe/Norway Juvvassh\u00f8e, southern Norway Janssonhaugen, Svalbard +0.5 to +1.0\u00b0C +1\u00b0 to +2\u00b0C Isaksen et al., 2001 Isaksen et al., 2000 Asia/China Qinghai-Tibet Plateau (1970s-90s) +0.1 to +0.3\u00b0C Huijin et al., 2000 Asia/Kazakstan Northern Tien Shan (1973-2003) +0.2\u00b0 to +0.6\u00b0C Marchenko, 1999 and 2002 Asia/Mongolia Khentei and Khangai Mountains, Lake Hovsgol (1973-2003) +0.3\u00b0 to +0.6\u00b0C Sharkhuu, 2003 Permafrost degradation can substantially change the surface hydrology in many ways. Within the area with ice-rich permafrost and poor drainage conditions permafrost degradation will lead to significant ground surface subsidence and pounding (\"wet thermokarst\"). The ground will become over-saturated, which could cause trees to die (Osterkamp et al., 2000; Jorgenson et al., 2001). Permafrost degradation on well-drained portions of slopes and highlands will proceed in a form of \"dry thermokarst\". This process will further improve the drainage conditions and lead to a decrease in the ground water content (Hinzman et al., 2003). Changes in the active layer thickness and permafrost continuity will affect ground water and river runoffs. Northern ecological systems depend on permafrost conditions. Permafrost controls plant communities and biomass production by soil temperature, active layer thickness, moisture content, presence of unfrozen water, and surface hydrology. The changes in the permafrost thermal regime and active layer thickness can affect plant diversity and biomass. The thawing of the ice-rich permafrost within the boreal forest biome can lead to destruction of the substrate and major changes in ecosystems. In case of the \"wet thermokarst\" scenario of permafrost degradation, changes can result in replacement of the boreal forest with wetlands. In case of \"dry thermokarst\", the boreal forest ecosystems may be replaced by steppe-like habitats. Long-term permafrost degradation (even without active thermokarst processes) will continuously improve conditions for the subsurface water drainage (especially in sandy soils) that will lead to increased dryness of soils, putting significant stress on vegetation. Improved drainage conditions will also lead to shrinkage of numerous ponds within the degrading permafrost area dramatically affecting aquatic ecosystems (Yoshikawa and Hinzman, 2003). Figure 6. Thermokarst depression on the edge of the Geophysical Institute UAF parking lot (Fairbanks, Alaska). Surface disturbance related to the parking lot construction triggered permafrost degradation and ground ice melting. Significant amounts of carbon are now sequestered in perennially frozen soils (permafrost) and within the active layer, which thaw every summer but completely re-freeze during the following winter, where the organic matter decomposition is slow. That is why the majority of northern ecosystems are apparently carbon sinks at present time. Climate warming and drying caused by this warming permafrost degradation will change this situation. A thicker, warmer and dryer active layer will be much friendlier for microbial activities during the summer. Significantly later freeze-up of this layer in winter and warmer winter temperatures (that means much more unfrozen water in it) will considerably enhance the microbial activities during the winter. So, the arctic and sub-arctic ecosystems could turn into a source of CO2 (especially on an annual basis) very soon. Further permafrost degradation and formation of taliks will amplify these changes because a layer that will not freeze during the entire winter (talik) will appear above the permafrost, where microbial activities will not cease during the winter. In the area of \"wet thermokarst\" formation, new and significant sources of CH4 will be developing. Thaw settlement related to permafrost degradation is presently responsible for damage to houses, roads, airports, military installations, pipelines, and other facilities founded on ice-rich permafrost (Osterkamp et al., 1997). Any natural increase in the mean annual surface temperature of permafrost and subsequent thaw settlement would create severe maintenance problems for facilities in the Arctic and Sub-Arctic, adding to effects already being observed (Figure 6). Some structures, airports, and roads might have to be abandoned if funds are not adequate to continue repairs (Esch and Osterkamp, 1990). Gallery of Permafrost Photographs Permafrost Gallery I - Page 1 | 2 Permafrost Gallery II - Page 1 | 2 | 3 Publications Allard, M., B. Wang and J.A. Pilon, 1995. Recent cooling along the southern shore of Hudson Strait, Quebec, Canada, documented from permafrost temperature measurements. Arctic and Alpine Research, 27:157-166. Couture, R., S. Smith, S.D. Robinson, M.M. Burgess and S. Solomon, 2003. On the hazards to infrastructure in the Canadian North associated with thawing of permafrost. Proceedings of Geohazards 2003, Third Canadian Conference on Geotechnique and Natural Hazards, pp. 97-104. Canadian Geotechnical Society. Esch, D.C., and Osterkamp, T.E. (1990) Cold region engineering: Climatic warming concerns for Alaska, J. Cold Regions Engineering, 4(1), 6-14. Federov, A.N., 1996: Effects of recent climate change on permafrost landscapes in central Sakha. Polar Geography, 20, 99-108. Federov, A. and P. Konstantinov, Observations of surface dynamics with thermokarst initiation, Yukechi site, Central Yakutia. In: Proceedings of the VII International Permafrost Conference, Switzerland, July 21-25, pp. 239-243, 2003. Gavriliev, P. P. and P. V. Efremov, Effects of cryogenic processes on Yakutian landscapes under climate warming. In: Proceedings of the VII International Permafrost Conference, Switzerland, July 21-25, pp. 277-282, 2003. Hinzman, L.D., Kane, D.L., Yoshikawa, K., Carr, A., Bolton, W.R., and M. Fraver, Hydrological variations among watersheds with varying degrees of permafrost. In: Proceedings of the VII International Permafrost Conference, Switzerland, July 21-25, pp. 407-411, 2003. Isaksen, K., P. Holmlund, J.L. Sollid and C. Harris, 2001. Three deep alpine-permafrost boreholes in Svalbard and Scandinavia. Permafrost and Periglacial Processes, 12:13-25. Jorgenson, M.T., Racine, C.H., Walters, J.C., and Osterkamp, T.E., 2001: Permafrost degradation and ecological changes associated with a warming climate in central Alaska. Climatic Change, 48(4), 551-571. Klimatologicheskii spravochnik SSSR, (1961-1992). Vypusk 24, po Yakutskoi ASSR, severnoi chasti Khabarovskogo kraya, Magadanskoi oblasti i severnoi chasti Kamchatskoi oblasti. Meteorologicheskie ezhemesyachnie dannye za 1961-1992, chast' II, VII, Temperatura pochvy, tumany, grozy, meteli i grad, Gidrometeoizdat, Leningrad (In Russian). Marchenko, S.S., Results of monitoring of the active layer in the northern Tien Shan mountains, Earth Cryosphere, v. VI, 3, 25-34, 2002 (in Russian). Oberman, N.G. and G.G. Mazhitova, Permafrost dynamics in the north-east of European Russia at the end of the 20th century. Norwegian Journal of Geography, 55, 241-244, 2001. Osterkamp, T.E., 2003. A thermal history of permafrost in Alaska. Proceedings of Eighth International Conference on Permafrost, Zurich, pp. 863-868. Osterkamp, T.E., D.C. Esch, and V.E. Romanovsky, Infrastructure: Effects of climatic warming on planning, construction and maintenance, Proc. of the BESIS Workshop, Univ. of Alaska, Fairbanks, AK, pp. 115-127, 1997. Osterkamp, T.E., and V.E. Romanovsky, Evidence for warming and thawing of discontinuous permafrost in Alaska, Permafrost and Periglacial Processes, 10(1), 17-37, 1999. Osterkamp, T.E., L. Vierek, Y. Shur, M.T. Jorgenson, C. Racine, A. Doyle and R.D. Boone, 2000: Observations of thermokarst and its impact on boreal forests in Alaska, U.S.A. Arctic, Antarctic and Alpine Research, 32, 303-315. Pavlov, A.V., Current changes of climate and permafrost in the Arctic and Sub-Arctic of Russia, Permafrost and Periglacial Processes, 5, 101-110, 1994. Romanovsky, V.E., and T.E. Osterkamp, Permafrost: Changes and Impacts, in: R. Paepe and V. Melnikov (eds.), \"Permafrost Response on Economic Development, Environmental Security and Natural Resources\", Kluwer Academic Publishers, 297-315, 2001. Romanovsky, V. E., Shender, N. I., Sazonova, T. S., Balobaev, V. T., Tipenko, G. S. and Rusakov, V. G., Permafrost Temperatures in Alaska and East Siberia: Past, Present and Future, in: Proceedings of the Second Russian Conference on Geocryology (Permafrost Science), Moscow, June 6-8, pp. 301-314, 2001. Romanovsky, V., M. Burgess, S. Smith, K. Yoshikawa, and J. Brown, Permafrost Temperature Records: Indicators of Climate Change, EOS, AGU Transactions, Vol. 83, No. 50, 589-594, December 10, 2002. Sharkhuu, N., Recent changes in the permafrost of Mongolia. In: Proceedings of the VII International Permafrost Conference, Switzerland, July 21-25, pp. 1029-1034, 2003. Smith, S.L., M.M. Burgess and A.E. Taylor, 2003. High Arctic permafrost observatory at Alert, Nunavut - analysis of a 23-year data set. Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Permafrost, 1073-1078. Yoshikawa, K. and L.D. Hinzman, Shrinking thermokarst ponds and groundwater dynamics in discontinuous permafrost near Council, Alaska, Permafrost and Periglacial Processes, 14(2): 151-160, 2003. 7/13/2004 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory | Arctic Zone oar.pmel.arctic.webmaster@noaa.gov DOC | NOAA | OAR | PMEL | Arctic Zone | Privacy Policy | Disclaimer Arctic Zone Sitemap", "In Alaska's Thawing Permafrost, Humanity's 'Library Is on Fire' | InsideClimate News Skip to main content Home About Contact Reporting Network Newsletter Sign-Up Whistleblowers Awards Membership Donate A Pulitzer Prize-winning, non-profit, non-partisan news organization dedicated to covering climate change, energy and the environment. Menu News InvestigationsDangers Without Borders Harvesting Peril Choke Hold Exxon: The Road Not Taken The Dilbit Disaster Big Oil + Bad Air Clean Break Bloomberg's Hidden Legacy Keystone & Beyond Meltdown: Terror at the Top of the World Topics Today's Climate Clean Economy Videos InfographicsInfographics Documents EBooks Home About Contact Reporting Network Newsletter Sign-Up Whistleblowers Awards Membership Donate Hot Topics: Arctic Agriculture Military Clean Energy Climate Science Extreme Weather Exxon Investigation Home In Alaska's Thawing Permafrost, Humanity's 'Library Is on Fire' Rising Arctic temperatures are destroying ancient artifacts once preserved in the frozen ground and taking a toll on native traditions that depend on the sea ice. By Sabrina Shankman Nov 30, 2017 This story was co-published with The Weather Channel. The Internet connection is bad. As Herman Ahsoak speaks into his iPhone, the video chat freezes periodically, his face fixed in strange contortions on the screen. Ahsoak is in Utqiagvik, Alaska, formerly known as Barrow, the northernmost community in the United States; he is speaking to a class of high school students in Kaktovik, the only community within the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, more than 300 miles east. A member of the Inupiaq, whose people have lived on the North Slope for thousands of years, Ahsoak is demonstrating how to make an ulu\u2014a knife used to skin and clean animals. \"My father, when I was coming of age, he would make these in our living room,\" he says, his hands expertly attaching a caribou antler handle to the curved blade. \"I just happened to pay attention.\" Herman Ahsoak teaches students by video chat how to make an ulu, a knife traditionally used by subsistence hunters to skin and butcher animals. Credit: Sabrina Shankman Ahsoak is a whaling captain and subsistence hunter, and he has ulus for all occasions: for walrus, for belugas, and for the bowhead whales that he and other members of his community hunt each fall and spring. But in Kaktovik, which is also an Inupiat community where people live off the food they hunt, the making of ulus has become nearly a lost art; most of the people who knew the craft have died or left. As the video feed stutters, the students take notes diligently while Ahsoak's voice carries through the line. Things have changed on the North Slope since Ahsoak, 53, was a boy. It's been decades since the dog teams were replaced by all-terrain vehicles and snowmobiles, and graffiti on the side of one house in Utqiagvik gives a shout-out to the Wu-Tang Clan. But it's the changes in the environment that are the most profound: With temperatures rising faster in the Arctic than anywhere else in the world with emissions from carbon dioxide and short-lived climate pollutants such as methane and black carbon, the very ground on which communities are built is slumping as the permafrost thaws, and the sea ice that sustains vital animal populations is melting earlier and re-forming later than ever before. Less sea ice means stronger storms and bigger waves, and villages across the region are at risk of falling into the sea as each year coastal erosion eats away at the shoreline. As Ahsoak works to preserve Inupiaq culture, the physical world that shaped that culture is facing an urgent threat. That's the context in which the archaeologist Anne Jensen, a native of upstate New York who arrived in Utqiagvik 22 years ago, is at work on another project of cultural preservation. The\u00a0Ukpea\u0121vik I\u00f1upiat Corporation\u00a0(UIC), the local native corporation, hired her in the 1990s to help preserve and learn about archaeological sites in the area. Every summer, Jensen and a crew of volunteers venture out to remote areas, sleeping in tents to excavate sites that are hundreds or thousands of years old. It was on one of these digs in the early 2000s that Jensen and Ahsoak first crossed paths\u2014he worked as a logistics coordinator and bear guard as Jensen excavated a historical site on Point Barrow, learning about how Ahsoak's ancestors once lived. While their methods differ, Ahsoak and Jensen's missions in many ways align. And in climate change, they face a common obstacle. The homes, weapons, and even bodies that Jensen digs up are extraordinarily well preserved\u2014unlike archaeological sites elsewhere in the world, these pieces of history have been locked in ice. But as the permafrost thaws, so do these sites, and as erosion eats away at the coast, it's washing away the history locked inside it. Once gone, the story that these sites can tell, about food webs, migratory patterns, and traditional ways of life, will disappear too. Just as Ahsoak is working to preserve his community's traditions, Jensen is racing to capture this historical record before it's lost\u2014and, perhaps, to find in the region's past some answers for its future. Archaeologists who work in the Arctic, Jensen says, have a metaphor for what is happening. The Library of Alexandria was the most famous site for cultural knowledge and history in ancient Egypt, until it burned down, taking with it an irreplaceable record. The decomposition and disappearance of some of the world's best-preserved sites is much the same, she says: \"It's like the library is on fire.\" 'A Different Calculus' Picture an archaeologist at work: Your mind probably conjures an image of a scientist hunched over a sandy expanse or rocky outcropping, painstakingly sifting for artifacts, perhaps spending months or years on the same patch of earth. But Jensen's work, in the shifting, daunting conditions of the Arctic, requires \"a different calculus,\" she says. \"You're making choices about how to proceed as fast as possible without losing more data than necessary.\" Archeologist Anne Jensen has been working on cultural preservation projects in Utqiagvik for 22 years. The job has become more urgent as permafrost thaws. Credit: Sabrina Shankman The differences start with the permafrost, the layer of frozen ground that lies beneath the surface. In summer months, Jensen and a team of volunteers travel to dig sites, sleeping in tents and combating hordes of mosquitoes. They begin by opening the ground, giving the permafrost beneath a chance to thaw and soften. It's important to open a large enough area at the start. \"You can't suddenly decide halfway through the field season, 'Oh, I need to move another meter to the right,' she says. \"It's not going to thaw fast enough.\" The permafrost that holds artifacts trapped also acts as an extraordinary preservative\u2014the key to the region's archaeological value. A bone that is thousands of years old, Jensen says, can look \"like the animal died a few years ago.\" Because the sites are so well preserved, organic matter, such as animal remains, pelts and ancient plants, retains extractable DNA that can hold insights about the historical food web. Jensen believes this knowledge can be relevant today, as migratory routes and habitats shift in response to climate change and industrial development. Anne Jensen and her team have preserved a wide range of historic artifacts, including tools, sleds and houses, as well as ancient human and animal remains. Credit: Sabrina Shankman/InsideClimate News There are also clues, she says, in the human artifacts\u2014tools like the ulus Ahsoak still makes, sleds, even houses\u2014that she and her colleagues find across the Arctic. These artifacts are part of Inupiat cultural legacy, which is one reason the tribe employs Jensen to excavate these sites. They also hold lessons about how earlier inhabitants responded to changes in the environment: In the face of encroaching seas, did they move inland or relocate entirely? As their food sources shifted, did their quality of life change? What sorts of events spelled disaster for a community, and what were they able to survive? \"The course of history has been defined by big changes\u2014not as fast or severe as the ones we're seeing now\u2014but they caused changes,\" she says. \"You can start seeing what kinds of responses were attractive to people, and what actions did they take.\" There is urgency in her work to find lessons that may have contemporary relevance\u2014but also because many of the discoveries that remain are literally disappearing. The permafrost that has preserved these sites is thawing, and that process sets in motion bacterial and chemical decay. It's a death sentence for organic artifacts. Thomas McGovern, a professor of archaeology at Hunter College, has spent his career studying ancient Viking sites in Greenland, where the thawing of permafrost is even more advanced than in Alaska. A few years ago, graduate students working with McGovern went back to look at sites that had been well preserved. \"They started popping open holes and finding that the bone preservation is gone. It's just mush,\" he said. Jensen is starting to see the same sort of degradation near Utqiagvik. \"We're losing the organics,\" she said. \"That's the piece we're going to lose, and it's a huge piece.\" With less sea ice to protect the shoreline, coastal erosion is accelerating and unearthing historic artifacts. Credit: Sabrina Shankman Another challenge is even more pressing. Coastal erosion, a perpetual feature of life in the Arctic, is accelerating. Climate change produces stronger storms, less sea ice leads to bigger waves, and thawing permafrost means the ground breaks away more readily. Sometimes, erosion leads to new finds: The main site Jensen is working on now, called Walakpa, was partially excavated in the late 1960s, but in 2013, when part of a bluff fell into the ocean, an ancient house was exposed, opening up new research opportunities. But she has to work quickly. In the years she's been at Walakpa, Jensen says, 39 feet of the site have disappeared. Other sites across the region are simply gone\u2014one storm will expose a site, the next can wash it away. Last summer, as fieldwork was winding down, Jensen and her team discovered part of a polar bear skull. It was a significant find, because years earlier they had discovered a similar skull that was abnormally large, and possibly indicative of a new subspecies. But the earth around this skull was still frozen, locking it in in place. They resorted to drastic action\u2014boiling water, a portable heater, a tarp\u2014to soften the ground and remove the skull before leaving the site. It wasn't an option to wait until next year, she says. \"We won't know until we get back out there if that area will survive the winter.\" 'This Didn't Used to Happen at All' To see the changes in Utqiagvik, you don't have to walk any further than Herman Ahsoak's back door. One day in August, his backyard was pocked with gigantic puddles\u2014some more like small ponds\u2014where standing water from the rainiest summer anyone could remember sat atop frozen ground. A few steps out the door, whitefish were hanging out to dry, and a walrus skull soaked in a tub. Out in the yard, amid tall grass, the traditional skin boat he uses for the spring whaling season sat covered in plastic. He's had to start storing it that way in recent years as the weather has become warmer and more humid, Ahsoak explained, so that it doesn't get covered in mold. The frozen walls of Herman Ahsoak\u2019s ice cellar, where he stores whale meat after hunts, don\u2019t normally melt, but that\u2019s starting to change. Credit: Sabrina Shankman Wearing tall rubber boots, Ahsoak sloshed through the puddles until he reached his family's si\u0121luaq, or ice cellar. The si\u0121luaq plays a central role in North Slope subsistence hunting communities: After the whaling season, the animals' meat is stored in the ground, where it ferments before it is eaten. But that requires a cold cellar. As permafrost thaws, according to one local official, there are stories of meat going spoiled. When Ahsoak pried open the heavy wooden top, he could see slush around the cellar's base. \"That's quite surprising to see so much water in there,\" he said. \"This didn't used to happen at all.\" Like many people here, Ahsoak grew up with a deep respect for the traditions of his ancestors. Today, he is a prolific creator in the workshop of the local heritage center, an instructor who teaches classes on how to make ulus and traditional drums, and a de facto cultural ambassador to visitors in Utqiagvik, with a well-practiced explanation of the ins and outs of whaling. It's a way to remind people: This is who we are. This is why we matter. But in a subsistence culture, passing on skills and knowledge also has direct daily significance. The co-captains of Ahsoak's whaling crew are his 28-year-old niece, Flora, and his nephew, Jonas, who is also his harpooner. His twin boys, now 12, started joining him on the whale hunt when they were 10, first learning how to find the right kind of snow to melt for water, and now learning how to help butcher whales. Sea ice is changing as temperatures rise, leaving the next generation facing new challenges as they learn the traditions passed down from their ancestors. Credit: Sabrina Shankman \"You try to teach the boys and girls hunting terminology when you're out there with them: the ocean currents, the wind direction, the animals they're catching and the parts of the animal they're cutting up,\" he says. Jensen says, \"Whaling is a very traditional activity, and traditional knowledge transmission\u2014which Herman is keeping up\u2014was about participating: Watch and learn, listen and learn.\" The world that was the basis for that knowledge, though, is changing fast. Ahsoak grew up learning that the sea ice, which makes walrus and other animals accessible to hunters, would go through a period of melting and re-forming in the spring, before it disappeared for the summer. \"Nowadays, when the ice goes, we don't see it again,\" he says. Thick sea ice has also provided a surface to butcher bowhead whales, which can weigh 75 to 100 tons. During the last spring season, according to several whaling captains, thin ice broke beneath a whale's weight just as a storm was coming in. Fortunately, no one was hurt and the whaling crew was able to salvage the meat, but it was a lesson about the new reality that won't be forgotten soon. 'We Wonder How You Lived' When Herman Ahsoak was a boy, there was a long, gently sloped hill that ran down to the beach. It was a favorite sledding spot for local children\u2014\"the main attraction,\" he says with a smile. The site looks different now. It turns out Ahsoak and his friends\u2014and generations before them, too\u2014had been sledding over the frozen remains of their ancestors. The first discovery came in the early 1980s, when an eroding bluff uncovered a family from the 1800s that was frozen in the ground, apparently killed in a natural disaster. As the permafrost thawed, the well-preserved body of a young girl who lived in the area hundreds of years ago was discovered in an eroding bluff. Credit: Sabrina Shankman Then, in the mid-1980s, a powerful fall storm ripped through Utqiagvik, tearing off the face of an adjacent hill. Amid the broken pieces of permafrost was an unmistakable sight: a human foot, with a pale sliver of skin exposed above a still-intact mukluk. Before the site could be excavated, another storm hit Utqiagvik, ripping further into the bluff and taking the body, which had been nicknamed Uncle Foot, with it. A decade later, Jensen was visiting Utqiagvik before settling there, and she fielded a request to examine a new find at the site. Declining sea ice and an increase in storms had eroded the area further, exposing another mystery. This time, it began with the hood of a bird-skin parka that was sticking out of the ground. The parka covered the body of a young girl\u2014the best-preserved ever recovered in Alaska\u2014who had lived there sometime in the 1200s. Genetic testing revealed that the girl had suffered from a disease that made her an invalid, but that she was cared for by her community. At the request of the elders in the community, she was treated as a person, not a scientific specimen, so her autopsy and reburial was fast-tracked. She was buried with a letter from local children, who addressed her as \"Agnaiyaaq,\" or \"Dear Young Girl.\" \"You are very special and old,\" they wrote. \"We wonder how you lived.\" A few years ago, more human remains were found near the same location. The site has since been protected by sandbags and caution tape, but it's unclear if it will ever be fully excavated. There are fears that further digging could weaken the permafrost that supports a nearby road, and the waves below continue to crash closer. Anne Jensen and her team excavate an area where historic ruins were discovered in northern Alaska. Credit: Weather Channel Each year, warming temperatures, rising seas, and increasingly powerful storms take another bite into the history here\u2014and the present. If it's still possible for people in many corners of the world to ignore what scientists say is coming, in Utqiagvik, it's hard not to talk about climate change. It is, quite literally, everywhere you look. In their own ways, both Ahsoak and Jensen are trying to retain essential parts of the past, and help the community adapt to a new reality. Jensen also has another hope\u2014that this work might make climate change more immediate to the rest of the world, while there still might be some time left to do something about it. \"You can stand there and give people all sorts of data about sea level going up and whatnot, but it's really hard for people to envision what that means,\" Jensen says. \"The more you can bring people into the story\u2014actual once-living people\u2014the more people get it and relate to it. And then once they relate to it, they start thinking about, 'Oh that could be me, that could be us'.\" Top photo:\u00a0The Inupiaq have lived on the North Slope for thousands of years, relying on sea ice, whaling and the frozen ground. Credit: Sabrina Shankman Subscribe to InsideClimate News Email Newsletters Articles & Investigations Today's Climate Clean Economy Week in Review Subscribe More From The Author The U.S. Military Needed New Icebreakers Years Ago. A Melting Arctic Is Raising the National Security Stakes. By Sabrina Shankman U.S. Starts Process to Open Arctic to Offshore Drilling, Despite Federal Lawsuit By Sabrina Shankman Drier Autumns Are Fueling Deadly California Wildfires By Sabrina Shankman More by Sabrina Shankman Whistleblowers Jobs & Freelance Privacy Policy & Legal Our E-Books Keep Environmental Journalism Alive Donate Now News Investigations Topics Today's Climate Clean Economy Videos Infographics EBooks Facebook Twitter Google Plus Email LinkedIn RSS RSS Instagram YouTube", "Glossary - International Permafrost Association Arctic Portal AP Community Portlets Arctic Council Science Organizations Maps Library Acronyms Links Search International Permafrost Association Fostering permafrost research to the ends of the Earth Search ... Member login Contact \ufeff Menu HomeAbout Us Antarctic Permafrost and Periglacial EnvironmentsCoastal and Offshore Permafrost Dynamics (COPD)CryosolGlaciers and Permafrost Hazards in High Mountain Slopes (GAPHAZ)Isotopes and Geochemistry of PermafrostPeriglacial Landforms, Processes and ClimatePermafrost and Climate Modeling and Mapping Subgroup Planetary Permafrost and AstrobiologyPermafrost Engineering Subgroup on Engineering Geology for Development in Permafrost Regions Task Force on Remote SensingTask Force on Subglacial PermafrostStanding Committee on Data, Information and CommunicationsStanding Committee on Education and OutreachInternational Advisory Committee for ICOPCarbon Pools in Permafrost Regions (CAPP)Arctic Circumpolar Coastal Observatory Network (ACCONET)Arctic Coastal Dynamics (ACD)International Polar Year (2007-2009) OfficersCountry MembersConstitutionResolutionsExternal RelationsStanding Committees ANTPASEducation & Outreach HistoryBecome a Member Activities Action GroupsInterest Groups Permafrost and Carbon Budgets Core Projects PRP IPA Awards Pewe AwardMelnikov AwardLifetime Award Outreach Outreach ActivitiesPYRN Meetings International ConferencesRegional Conferences Publications IPA Newsletter - Frozen GroundIPA Country ReportsPPP ReportsConference ProceedingsReports and MinutesHandbookGlossaryOccasional Publications What is Permafrost?International Report \"State of the Arctic Coast 2010\" Products Permafrost Data IPA Permafrost MapGTN-P Workshop 2015GTN-P Workshop 2013GTN-P Workshop 2011TSPCALM Mailing ListCourses (IUCP)Media PrintGalleriesPodcasts Member Area Home Publications Glossary Glossary Download the Glossary of Permafrost and Related Ground-Ice Terms (1988) here. The IPA is planning to publish an update of the Glossary in the near future. IPA Newsletter - Frozen Ground IPA Country Reports PPP Reports Conference Proceedings Reports and Minutes Handbook Glossary Occasional Publications What is Permafrost? Contact: contact@ipa-permafrost.orgThe International Permafrost Association website is designed and hosted by the Arctic PortalCopyright \u00a9 2008-2015 International Permafrost Association All Rights Reserved IPA on Facebook IPA on Twitter IPA on Youtube IPA RSS", "Permafrost We use cookies to make interactions with our website easy and meaningful, to better understand the use of our services, and to tailor advertising. For further information, including about cookie settings, please read our Cookie Policy . By continuing to use this site, you consent to the use of cookies.Got ittopSee all \u203a1 CitationsDownload citationShare Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Google+ RedditRequest full-textPermafrostArticle\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0January 1951\u2002with\u20024 ReadsDOI: 10.14430/arctic3944 Cite this publication Louis L. RayAbstractContains text of a lecture delivered before the Permafrost Symposium at the First Alaskan Science Conference, Nov. 1950, Washington, D.C., dealing with the history of knowledge and exploration of permafrost; definitions and terminology; distribution and character: its vertical distribution, zones, kinds, etc; relation to climatic fluctuations; ice in permafrost; relation to vegetation; ground water, etc. \"Permafrost or perennially frozen ground extends over one-fifth of the land area of the earth. Regions of permafrost has been classed as: continuous, discontinuous and sporadic. Permafrost has been observed to depths of approximately 2000 ft. in Siberia and 1000 ft in Alaska. The temperature below the level of zero amplitude within the permafrost ranges from slightly less than 0\u00b0 C. The surface layer above the permafrost thaws partially or completely and is called the active zone. Plants are rooted in it and all churning and soil movements take place in the active zone. An unfrozen layer between the permafrost table and the active zone, or...within or below the permafrost, is called talik. Observations indicate that the southern boundary of permafrost is slowly moving northward due to present climatic flucuations. Utilization of permafrost and the problems involved are discussed.\"--SIPRE. Bibliography (16 items).Do you want to read the rest of this article?Request full-text Citations (1)References (0)TundraChapterJul 2015 Eric G. Bolen Brian R. ChapmanThe Tundra Biome is one of two circumpolar biomes, the Boreal Forest Biome is the other, ringing the Northern Hemisphere. Arctic Tundra lies immediately below the polar cap of perpetual ice and snow. In North America, a broad wedge of tundra extends from the western shore of Hudson's Bay near Churchill, Manitoba, to the mouth of the Coppermine River in the Northwest Territories. Other zones of tundra occur east of Hudson's Bay, across northern Alaska, and on numerous islands in the High Arctic. A somewhat ambiguous border known as the tree line marks the southern edge of the Tundra Biome. The Boreal Forest Biome lies beyond. The coldest of all the biomes, Tundra is a harsh landscape of few resources. The biota, adapted to the rigors of the far north, is not as species rich in comparison to most plant and animal communities developing elsewhere in North America.ViewShow abstractThis research doesn't cite any other publications.AdJoin ResearchGate to find the people and research you need to help your work.15+ million members118+ million publications700k+ research projectsJoin for freeRecommended publicationsDiscover more publications, questions and projects in PermafrostArticleEstimating the water balance of a thermokarst lake in the middle of the Lena River basin, Eastern Si...April 2014 \u00b7 EcohydrologyP. P. GavrilievPavel Konstantinov Alexander Fedorov[...] Go IwahanaPermafrost degradation and changes in water balance in a thermokarst lake in the middle part of the Lena River basin in eastern Siberia were investigated. We analysed the role of permafrost thawing in the water balance of a growing thermokarst lake. Long-term observations during the last two decades (1992\u20132008) at our thermokarst monitoring site, Yukechi, showed significant modifications of the ... [Show full abstract] landforms. Observations included ground temperature, thawing depth, soil moisture content in the active layer, surface subsidence rate, and ecological changes in the surrounding environment. We also used data obtained at the Yakutsk weather station to estimate the potential evaporation. During the observation period, the water surface area increased steadily from 195 m2 in 1993 to 3135 m2 in 2008, and the lake water increased from 33\u00b77 m3 in 1993 to 3503 m3 in 2008. Water balance estimations showed that ground ice melt made up to one third of the total water input into the lake. The rapid development of growing thermokarst lakes indicates an ecological risk on the edges of cryogenic landscapes. Finally, we found that climate change and anthropogenic impacts have led to enhanced activity of cryogenic processes in the region. In particular, cultivated fields underlying ice-rich permafrost face enhanced degradation by cryogenic and hydrological processes because of recent climate change in the region. Copyright \u00a9 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.Read moreArticleFull-text availablePermafrost Thawing in Circum-Arctic and Highlands under Climatic Change Scenario Projected by Commun...January 2006 \u00b7 Scientific online letters on the atmosphere: SOLA Keiichi NishizawaYoshikatsu YoshidaKoki Maruyama Hideyuki KitabataFrom three-member ensemble projections under the climatic change scenario, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Special Report Emissions Scenarios (SRES) A1B, regional impacts of global warming on near-surface permafrost are investigated for six analysis regions in the circum-arctic and highlands: Alaska, Alaskan Arctic, Canadian Arctic, Eastern Siberia, Russian Arctic, and ... [Show full abstract] Tibetan Plateau, using the Community Climate System Model version 3 (CCSM3). The projected results for the 21st century under the A1B scenario indicated that the ice volume in the deepest model soil layer at about 3 m depth, which had been completely frozen during the 1870s in the historical simulation, begins to melt abruptly at around 2000 in each region. Particularly in Alaska and Eastern Siberia which are more advanced than the other regions in the thawing of permafrost, more than 50% of the ice volume disappears by 2030. From a viewpoint of regional vulnerability, the Alaskan Arctic at around 2020 may suffer the most severe damage as it has the highest thawing rate. Owing to thawing of the frozen soil, subsurface runoff increases by 215.4% and soil moisture decreases by. 19.3% in Eastern Siberia for the 1990s to the 2090s.View full-textArticleFull-text availableCircumpolar Mapping of Ground-Fast Lake IceFebruary 2017 \u00b7 Frontiers in Earth ScienceGeorg Pointner Marina O. LeibmanAnna Maria Trofaier[...] Annett BartschShallow lakes are common across the entire Arctic. They play an important role as methane sources and wildlife habitats, and they are also associated with thermokarst processes which are characteristic of permafrost environments. Many lakes freeze to the ground along their rims and often over the entire extent during winter time. Knowledge on the spatial patterns of ground-fast and floating ice ... [Show full abstract] is important as it relates to methane release, talik formation and hydrological processes, but no circumpolar account of this phenomenon is currently available. Previous studies have shown that ground-fast ice can easily be detected using C-band Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) backscatter intensity data acquired from satellites. A major challenge is that backscatter intensity varies across the satellite scenes due to incidence angle effects. Circumpolar application therefore requires the inclusion of incidence angle dependencies into the detection algorithm. An approach using ENVISAT ASAR Wide Swath data (approximately 120 m spatial resolution) has therefore been developed supported by bathymetric measurements for lakes in Siberia. This approach was then further applied across the entire Arctic for late winter 2008. Ground-fast ice fraction has been derived for (1) two million lake objects larger than 0.025 km2 (post-processed GlobeLand30), (2) a 50 \u00d7 50 km grid and (3) within certain zones relevant for climate studies (permafrost type, last glacial maximum, Yedoma). Especially lakes smaller than approximately 0.1 km2 may freeze completely to the ground. The proportion of ground-fast ice increases with increasing soil organic carbon content in the proximity of the lakes. This underlines the importance of such lakes for emission studies and the need to map the occurrence of ground-fast lake ice. Clusters of variable fractions of ground-fast ice occur especially in Yedoma regions of Eastern Siberia and Alaska. This reflects the nature of thaw lake dynamics. Analyses of lake depth measurements from several sites suggest that the used method yields the potential to utilize ground-fast lake ice information over larger areas with respect to landscape development, but results need to be treated with care, specifically for larger lakes and along river courses.View full-textArticlePermafrost at Mt. Taisetsu, Hokkaido and its Climatic EnvironmentJanuary 1974 \u00b7 The Quaternary Research (Daiyonki-Kenkyu)Seiichi KINOSHITAMasami FUKUDAIn this paper, the authors report the existence of permafrost at Mt. Taisetsu, Hokkaido, and disdiscuss the climatic significance of permafrost there from a viewpoint of the Quaternary palaecolimatology. Many researchers have observed that patterned grounds, especially sorted circles well developed on many gentle slopes and small depressions at Mt. Taisetsu. And recently it was reported that the ... [Show full abstract] networks of fissures of the ground which are similar to large scale ploygons on permafrost in Alaska were found at some places at Mt. Taisetsu. Those sorted circles and nets of fissures suggest the existence of permafrost which is believed to be either relict or recent.By our on-the-spot investigations at Mt. Taisetsu, permafrost was found on one of flat summits (2, 150m) by boring tests and geophysical methods. The maximum depth of the active layer was nearly 2m and the maximum depth of the lower limit of this permafrost was estimated to be 15m or larger. Its frozen soils consisted of weathered fine sands and gravels derived from an andesite bedrock, which are considered as frost-action products. Large sorted circles were form ed on the surface of permafrost.The mean annual temperature and degree-days in this area were calculated as -3.1\u00b0C and 2, 400 degree-days by extrapolations on the basis of meteorological data in Asahikawa. The estimated temperature and degree-days suggest that this area has the same climatic conditions as those in central Alasak, where discontinuous permafrost is distributed.Introducing the Popov's theory about the formation of an ice-wedge, we estimated the palaeo-temperature of the surface of the extended permafrost to be -7\u00b0--8\u00b0C (mean annual temperature) during a past colder period than present. Comparing the estimated chronology of the permafrost with the chronology of permafrost in Alaska and Siberia, and considering the field observations of fossil ice-wedge casts and polygons in Hokkaido, we may conclude that the permafrost at Mt. Taisetsu formed at the last ice age, after then gradually has become smaller, adapting itself to the present climatic conditions.Read moreDiscover moreDownload citationWhat type of file do you want? RIS BibTeX Plain TextWhat do you want to download? Citation only Citation and abstractDownloadLooking for the full-text?You can request the full-text of this article directly from the authors on ResearchGate.Request full-textAlready a member? Log inorDiscover by subject areaRecruit researchersJoin for freeLoginEmail Tip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inor log in withWelcome back! Please log in.Email \u00b7 HintTip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inor log in withNo account? Sign upAboutNewsCompanyCareersSupportHelp centerFAQBusiness solutionsRecruitingAdvertisingAd\u00a9 ResearchGate 2019. All rights reserved.ImprintTermsPrivacy", "What is Permafrost? - International Permafrost Association Arctic Portal AP Community Portlets Arctic Council Science Organizations Maps Library Acronyms Links Search International Permafrost Association Fostering permafrost research to the ends of the Earth Search ... Member login Contact \ufeff Menu HomeAbout Us Antarctic Permafrost and Periglacial EnvironmentsCoastal and Offshore Permafrost Dynamics (COPD)CryosolGlaciers and Permafrost Hazards in High Mountain Slopes (GAPHAZ)Isotopes and Geochemistry of PermafrostPeriglacial Landforms, Processes and ClimatePermafrost and Climate Modeling and Mapping Subgroup Planetary Permafrost and AstrobiologyPermafrost Engineering Subgroup on Engineering Geology for Development in Permafrost Regions Task Force on Remote SensingTask Force on Subglacial PermafrostStanding Committee on Data, Information and CommunicationsStanding Committee on Education and OutreachInternational Advisory Committee for ICOPCarbon Pools in Permafrost Regions (CAPP)Arctic Circumpolar Coastal Observatory Network (ACCONET)Arctic Coastal Dynamics (ACD)International Polar Year (2007-2009) OfficersCountry MembersConstitutionResolutionsExternal RelationsStanding Committees ANTPASEducation & Outreach HistoryBecome a Member Activities Action GroupsInterest Groups Permafrost and Carbon Budgets Core Projects PRP IPA Awards Pewe AwardMelnikov AwardLifetime Award Outreach Outreach ActivitiesPYRN Meetings International ConferencesRegional Conferences Publications IPA Newsletter - Frozen GroundIPA Country ReportsPPP ReportsConference ProceedingsReports and MinutesHandbookGlossaryOccasional Publications What is Permafrost?International Report \"State of the Arctic Coast 2010\" Products Permafrost Data IPA Permafrost MapGTN-P Workshop 2015GTN-P Workshop 2013GTN-P Workshop 2011TSPCALM Mailing ListCourses (IUCP)Media PrintGalleriesPodcasts Member Area Home Publications Occasional Publications What is Permafrost? What is permafrost? Permafrost Distribution Permafrost is defined as ground (soil or rock and included ice or organic material) that remains at or below 0\u00b0C for at least two consecutive years. Lowland permafrost regions are traditionally divided into several zones based on estimated geographic continuity in the landscape. A typical classification recognizes continuous permafrost (underlying 90-100% of the landscape); discontinuous permafrost (50-90%); and sporadic permafrost (0-50%). In the Northern Hemisphere, regions in which permafrost occurs occupy approximately 25% (23 million km\u00b2) of the land area. In the discontinuous and sporadic zones permafrost distribution is complex and patchy, and permafrost-free terrain is common. The thickness of permafrost varies from less than one meter to more than 1500 meters.Most of the permafrost existing today formed during cold glacial periods, and has persisted through warmer interglacial periods, including the {tooltip}Holocene{end-link}The Holocene is a geological epoch which began approximately 11,700 years ago{end-tooltip} (last 10,000 years). Some relatively shallow permafrost (30 to 70 meters) formed during the second part of the Holocene (last 6,000 years) and some during the Little Ice Age (from 400 to 150 years ago). In continental interiors permafrost temperatures at the boundaries between continuous and discontinuous are generally about -5\u00b0C corresponding roughly with the -8\u00b0C mean annual air temperature. Permafrost in mid- and low- latitude mountains is warm and its distribution is closely related to characteristics of the land surface, such slope gradient and orientation, vegetation patterns, and snow cover.Subsea permafrost occurs close to 0\u00b0C over large areas of the {tooltip}Arctic continental shelf{end-link}The continental shelf is the extended perimeter of each continent and associated coastal plain, and was part of the continent during the glacial periods, but is undersea during interglacial periods such as the current epoch by relatively shallow seas (known as shelf seas) and gulfs.{end-tooltip}, where it formed during the last glacial period on the exposed shelf landscapes. Permafrost is geographically continuous beneath the ice-free regions of the Antarctic continent and also occurs beneath areas in which the ice sheet is frozen to its bed. Recent Changes Permafrost can be used as a paleothermometer\u2014fluctuations of air temperature from the late 19th and 20th centuries can be obtained by measuring temperature in deep permafrost {tooltip}boreholes{end-link}A borehole is the generalised term for any narrow shaft drilled in the ground, either vertically or horizontally{end-tooltip}. Warming since the late 1960s has been observed in permafrost temperature profiles from many locations. Over the past several decades, permafrost temperature have generally warmed in lowlands and mountains; exceptions are in some newly exposed drained lake basins and aggrading shorelines where permafrost is forming. Thawing of permafrost has been observed in many lowland and mountain locations in recent decades\u2014much of the evidence is indirect, and is based on changes in forest and tundra vegetation, differential subsidence of the ground surface, and loss of lakes. Increases in {tooltip}active-layer{end-link}The layer of ground that is subject to annual thawing and freezing in areas underlain by permafrost{end-tooltip} thickness have been observed in warm summers (for western North America; 1989, 1998, 2004), resulting in increased slope failures, ground subsidence in ice-rich terrain, increased lake drainage.\u00a0 At regional and global scales, changes in permafrost zonal boundaries are difficult to identify due to 3-dimensional irregularities in permafrost distribution.\u00a0 Degradation of permafrost and changes in its distribution are associated with increased formation of {tooltip}\u201ctaliks\u201d{end-link}A layer or body of unfrozen ground occurring in a permafrost area due to a local anomaly in thermal, hydrological, hydrogeological, or hydrochemical conditions{end-tooltip}. Open taliks penetrate through the permafrost and closed taliks or thawed depressions occur under deep lakes and rivers. 21th Century Changes Changes in zonal permafrost \u201cboundaries\u201d modeled using climate-change scenarios are usually based on predictions of increased active-layer thickness and temperature changes at relatively shallow permafrost depths, not on the complete disappearance of permafrost. Warm permafrost degrades from both the top and bottom, increasing the extent of talik formation. The southern limit of permafrost moves northward in an irregular pattern, and is governed by localized factors that include {tooltip}peatland{end-link}Peat is an accumulation of partially decayed vegetation matter. Peat forms in wetlands or peatlands, variously called bogs, moors, muskegs, pocosins, mires, and peat swamp forests{end-tooltip} distribution, soil moisture, vegetation patterns, and snow cover. Movements of the \u201cboundary\u201d between the sporadic and discontinuous permafrost zones are largely governed by the development and extent of open taliks. In areas of ice-rich permafrost, the southern \u201cboundary\u201d of the continuous permafrost zone remains relatively stable as complete disappearance of permafrost may take centuries to millennia, making it difficult to determine geographic changes except where permafrost is thin. Rapid coastal erosion, although sustained by storms and related wave intensity, is highly dependent on the amount and type of {tooltip}ground ice{end-link}A general term referring to all types of ice contained in freezing and frozen ground.in the near-surface permafrost{end-tooltip}. Changes in permafrost distribution predicted by models require extensive field- or remote-sensed based verification over extended time periods (snapshots of permafrost temperature over decadal intervals). Monitoring of the thermal state of permafrost\u00a0 (TSP) at the global scale is required to understand hydrologic connections, future changes in permafrost distribution, and to serve as validation global and regional models.\u00a0 The International Polar Year (IPY) can leave a legacy for the understanding of permafrost dynamics through the IPA international observational networks (see www.ipy.org and projects 33, 50 and 90). More Reading All about frozen ground (NSIDC) What is permafrost? (Geological Survey of Canada) NSIDC's Permafrost and Frozen Ground glossary International Permafrost Association News UNEP's Global Outlook for Ice and Snow (Frozen Ground chapter) Permafrost- what is it? (Alfred Wegener Institute, also available in German) IPA Newsletter - Frozen Ground IPA Country Reports PPP Reports Conference Proceedings Reports and Minutes Handbook Glossary Occasional Publications What is Permafrost? Contact: contact@ipa-permafrost.orgThe International Permafrost Association website is designed and hosted by the Arctic PortalCopyright \u00a9 2008-2015 International Permafrost Association All Rights Reserved IPA on Facebook IPA on Twitter IPA on Youtube IPA RSS", "permafrost | National Geographic Society Who We AreAbout UsOur ExplorersOur HistoryOur LeadershipOur NewsroomWhat We DoProjects Big Cats InitiativeLast Wild PlacesOkavango Wilderness ProjectOut of Eden WalkPhoto ArkPhoto CampPlastics: Source to SeaPristine SeasSumatran Rhino RescueAll Impact ProgramsEducation Classroom ResourcesProfessional DevelopmentStudent ExperiencesBlogGrant ProgramsTechnology and InnovationD.C. Events & ExhibitionsOur ImpactOur AwardsOur BlogGet InvolvedGive to the SocietyAttend an Event or ExhibitionApply for a GrantGet UpdatesFOLLOW USTwitterFacebookGoogle+ Sign In Sign InCreate an AccountDonateEducationClassroom ResourcesResource LibraryMappingExplorer MagazineProfessional DevelopmentOnline CoursesEducator NetworkGrants for EducatorsGrosvenor Teacher FellowshipStudent ExperiencesGeoBeeGeoChallengeExplorer ClassroomStudent MatineesBlogEducationHomeClassroom ResourcesProfessional DevelopmentStudent ExperiencesBlogDonateWho We AreAbout UsOur ExplorersOur HistoryOur LeadershipOur NewsroomWhat We DoProjects HOMEBig Cats InitiativeLast Wild PlacesOkavango Wilderness ProjectOut of Eden WalkPhoto ArkPhoto CampPlastics: Source to SeaPristine SeasSumatran Rhino RescueAll Impact ProgramsEducation HOMEClassroom ResourcesProfessional DevelopmentStudent ExperiencesBlogGrant ProgramsTechnology and InnovationD.C. Events & ExhibitionsOur ImpactOur AwardsOur BlogGet InvolvedGive to the SocietyAttend an Event or ExhibitionApply for a GrantGet UpdatesFOLLOW USsearch Education EducationClassroom ResourcesProfessional DevelopmentStudent ExperiencesBlogsearchHomeNAT GEO SOCIETYWho We AreAbout UsOur ExplorersOur HistoryOur LeadershipOur NewsroomWhat We DoProjects HomeBig Cats InitiativeLast Wild PlacesOkavango Wilderness ProjectOut of Eden WalkPhoto ArkPhoto CampPlastics: Source to SeaPristine SeasSumatran Rhino RescueAll Impact ProgramsEducation HomeClassroom ResourcesProfessional DevelopmentStudent ExperiencesBlogGrant ProgramsTechnology and InnovationD.C. Events & ExhibitionsOur ImpactOur AwardsOur BlogGet InvolvedGive to the SocietyAttend an Event or ExhibitionApply for a GrantGet UpdatesFollow UsDonate Resource Library | Encyclopedic Entry permafrost Encyclopedic entry. Permafrost is a permanently frozen layer below the Earth\u2019s surface. It consists of soil, gravel, and sand, usually bound together by ice.Grades5 - 12, Higher EdSubjectsEarth science, Meteorology, Geography, Physical GeographyContents4 Photographs Twitter Facebook Google+ Google Classroom Email Print Encyclopedic Entry Vocabulary Permafrost is a permanently frozen layer below the Earths surface. It consists of soil, gravel, and sand, usually bound together by ice. Permafrost usually remains at or below 0C (32F) for at least two years. Permafrost can be found on land and below the ocean floor. It is found in areas where temperatures rarely rise above freezing. This means permafrost is often found in Arctic regions such as Greenland, the U.S. state of Alaska, Russia, China, and Eastern Europe. Permafrost thickness can range from 1 meter (3 feet) to more than 1,000 meters (3,281 feet). Permafrost covers approximately 22.8 million square kilometers (8.8 million square miles) in the Earth's Northern Hemisphere. Frozen ground is not always the same as permafrost. A layer of soil that freezes for more than 15 days per year is called \"seasonally frozen ground.\" A layer of soil that freezes between one and 15 days a year is called \"intermittently frozen ground.\" Permafrost is frozen for two years or more.Permafrost does not always form in one solid sheet. There are two major ways to describe its distribution: continuous and discontinuous. Continuous permafrost is just what it sounds like: a continuous sheet of frozen material. Continuous permafrost extends under all surfaces except large bodies of water in the area. The part of Russia known as Siberia has continuous permafrost.Discontinuous permafrost is broken up into separate areas. Some permafrost, in the shadow of a mountain or thick vegetation, stays all year. In other areas of discontinuous permafrost, the summer sun melts the permafrost for several weeks or months. The land near the southern shore of Hudson Bay, Canada, has discontinuous permafrost.Scientists who study permafrost are able to understand changes in the Earth's climate by observing changes in permafrost. Studies show the Earth's permafrost warmed by 6C during the 20th century. Scientists predict widespread melting of permafrost by 2100. Melting permafrost would raise water levels in the Earth's oceans and increase erosion. Erosion happens when permafrost melts because soil and sediment are easily washed away without the ice binding them together. Lakes and marshes in the Arctic are often shallow due to permafrost. Photograph by Mikaela Howie, MyShot Permafrost ArchitectureThough people do live in permafrost regions, such as Siberia, Canada, and Alaska, building on top of permafrost is difficult. Buildings raise the temperature of the ground beneath themwhich can melt permafrost and cause the building to sink in the mud. Engineers have found ways to build on top of permafrost without raising the ground temperature. These methods include building on top of wood piles or on top of thick gravel pads. Term Part of Speech Definition Encyclopedic Entry approximately Adjective generally or near an exact figure. Arctic Noun region at Earth's extreme north, encompassed by the Arctic Circle. Encyclopedic Entry: Arctic climate Noun all weather conditions for a given location over a period of time. Encyclopedic Entry: climate continuous permafrost Noun layer of soil that is permanently frozen. discontinuous permafrost Noun frozen layer of soil that thaws during the summer. erosion Noun act in which earth is worn away, often by water, wind, or ice. Encyclopedic Entry: erosion freezing Adjective at or below 0 degrees Celsius (32 degrees Fahrenheit). gravel Noun small stones or pebbles. ice Noun water in its solid form. Encyclopedic Entry: ice intermittently frozen ground Noun earth that freezes between one and fifteen days a year. mountain Noun landmass that forms as tectonic plates interact with each other. Northern Hemisphere Noun half of the Earth between the North Pole and the Equator. permafrost Noun permanently frozen layer of the Earth's surface. Encyclopedic Entry: permafrost sand Noun small, loose grains of disintegrated rocks. seasonally frozen ground Noun earth that freezes more than fifteen days a year, but less than two continuous years. sediment Noun solid material transported and deposited by water, ice, and wind. Encyclopedic Entry: sediment shadow Noun dark area where an object prevents light from reaching a surface. Siberia Noun region of land stretching across Russia from the Ural Mountains to the Pacific Ocean. soil Noun top layer of the Earth's surface where plants can grow. temperature Noun degree of hotness or coldness measured by a thermometer with a numerical scale. Encyclopedic Entry: temperature vegetation Noun all the plant life of a specific place. Articles & Profiles National Geographic News: Thawing Permafrost Could Supercharge Warming Websites International Permafrost Association: Find Out More About Permafrost Credits Media Credits The audio, illustrations, photos, and videos are credited beneath the media asset, except for promotional images, which generally link to another page that contains the media credit. The Rights Holder for media is the person or group credited. Writers Kim Rutledge Melissa McDaniel Diane Boudreau Tara Ramroop Santani Teng Erin Sprout Hilary Costa Hilary Hall Jeff Hunt Illustrators Tim Gunther Mary Crooks, National Geographic Society Editors Kara West Jeannie Evers, Emdash Editing Educator Reviewer Nancy Wynne Producer Caryl-Sue, National Geographic Society Sources Dunn, Margery G. (Editor). (1989, 1993). \"Exploring Your World: The Adventure of Geography.\" Washington, D.C.: National Geographic Society. Last Updated Feb. 15, 2011 User Permissions For information on user permissions, please read our Terms of Service. If you have questions about licensing content on this page, please contact ngimagecollection@natgeo.com for more information and to obtain a license. If you have questions about how to cite anything on our website in your project or classroom presentation, please visit our FAQ page. Media Some media assets (videos, photos, audio recordings and PDFs) can be downloaded and used outside the National Geographic website according to the Terms of Service. If a media asset is downloadable, a download button appears in the lower right hand corner () of the media viewer. If no button appears, you cannot download or save the media. Text Text on this page is printable and can be used according to our Terms of Service. Interactives Any interactives on this page can only be played while you are visiting our website. You cannot download interactives. Related Materials Key Concepts ice temperature arctic Northern Hemisphere soil permafrost Encyclopedia Quick FindA\u00a0B\u00a0C\u00a0D\u00a0E\u00a0F\u00a0G\u00a0H\u00a0I\u00a0J\u00a0K\u00a0L\u00a0M\u00a0N\u00a0O\u00a0P\u00a0Q\u00a0R\u00a0S\u00a0T\u00a0U\u00a0V\u00a0W\u00a0X\u00a0Y\u00a0Z Glossary Quick FindA\u00a0B\u00a0C\u00a0D\u00a0E\u00a0F\u00a0G\u00a0H\u00a0I\u00a0J\u00a0K\u00a0L\u00a0M\u00a0N\u00a0O\u00a0P\u00a0Q\u00a0R\u00a0S\u00a0T\u00a0U\u00a0V\u00a0W\u00a0X\u00a0Y\u00a0Z #Go to the Full Glossary \u00bb National Geographic Headquarters 1145 17th Street NW Washington, D.C. 20036 Connect About Us Newsroom Contact Us Careers at NGS Visit Our Museum Privacy Policy Sustainability Policy Terms of Service Code of Ethics Donate Get Updates Donate Get Updates Connect National Geographic Society is a 501 (c)(3) organization. \u00a9 1996 - 2019 National Geographic Society. All rights reserved. See our stories at NationalGeographic.com", "Melting Permafrost | Weather Underground Log in Join Bonjour ! Member Settings My Email Alerts My Webcams Sign Out Settings Settings \u00b0F \u00b0C Privacy preferences Sensor Network Sensor Network Weather Station Network PWS Buying Guide Connect a Weather Station Connect a Webcam Maps & Radar Maps & Radar WunderMap Interactive Radar Interactive Satellite Radar Maps Forecast Maps Full Maps Catalog Severe Weather Severe Weather Hurricane & Tropical Cyclones U.S. Severe Weather Map Convective Outlook Wildfires Preparedness Email Alerts News & Blogs News & Blogs Category 6 News Stories Videos Weather Infographics Weather Posters WUTV Blog Archive Apps Apps Weather Underground for iOS Weather Underground for Android WunderStation for iPad All Mobile Apps Sensor Network Weather Station Network PWS Buying Guide Connect a Weather Station Connect a Webcam Maps & Radar WunderMap Interactive Radar Interactive Satellite Radar Maps Forecast Maps Full Maps Catalog Severe Weather Hurricane & Tropical Cyclones U.S. Severe Weather Map Convective Outlook Wildfires Preparedness Email Alerts News & Blogs Category 6 News Stories Videos Weather Infographics Weather Posters WUTV Blog Archive Mobile Apps Weather Underground for iOS Weather Underground for Android WunderStation for iPad All Mobile Apps Historical Weather Daily Forecast Flyer Log in | Join \u00b0F \u00b0C More Settings Privacy preferences Permafrost In a Warming World Permafrost is permanently frozen soil, and occurs mostly in high latitudes. Permafrost comprises 24% of the land in the Northern Hemisphere, and stores massive amounts of carbon. As a result of climate change, permafrost is at risk of melting, releasing the stored carbon in the form of carbon dioxide and methane, which are powerful heat-trapping gases. In addition, permafrost is structurally important, and its melting has been known to cause erosion, disappearance of lakes, landslides, and ground subsidence. It will also cause changes in plant species composition at high latitudes. The Effect of Climate Change on Permafrost Greenhouse Gas Emissions Carbon Methane The Disaster Scenario Conclusion Related Blogs Resources Figure 1. Locations where permafrost exists in the Arctic (northern high latitudes). Click on the graphic for a larger image. Source: Philippe Rekacewicz, 2005. The Effect of Climate Change on Permafrost Permafrost is soil that has been frozen year round for at least two years. Permafrost comprises 24% of Northern Hemisphere land (Figure 1), and is also found, to a lesser extent, in the Southern Hemisphere. The upper layer of permafrost, or the active layer, sometimes thaws in the summer. Recently, the active layer of permafrost has been observed to be getting larger with time, which means more permafrost is melting each summer. This is not unexpected\u2014the high latitudes are expected to warm much more than low latitudes as the atmosphere continues to warm (Figure 2). Climate change is expected to significantly affect above and below-ground climate. Although widespread changes to permafrost usually take centuries, the IPCC estimates that by the mid-21st century, the area of permafrost in the northern hemisphere will decline by 20-35%. Additionally, the United Nations Environmental Programme suggests the depth of thawing could increase by 30-50% by the year 2080. Recent studies have shown that there has been a decrease in freezing during the cold season in North America's permafrost regions. Coastal areas and eastern Canada have started to see significant increases in warm season thawing of permafrost. This means there has been a decrease in freeze depths and in the amount of permafrost, and an increase in the area of the active layer. The increase in the active layer doesn't mean there's more ground being frozen, it means more permafrost is melting seasonally, losing its distinction as \"permanent.\" Permafrost is not only affected by climate change, but eventually will affect climate change itself by releasing the greenhouse gases it stores. Figure 2. Expected changes in Arctic temperatures by the year 2090. Blue solid line is current permafrost boundary (orange). Blue dashed line is projected permafrost boundary by 2090. Click on the graphic for a larger image. Source: Hugo Ahlenius, 2005. Greenhouse Gas Emissions Permafrost stores an immense amount of carbon and methane (twice as much carbon as contained in the atmosphere). In a warming environment, permafrost is expected to degrade, and these gases which have been in storage will be released. This process has already begun in some parts of the world, including western Siberia, and is expected to increase in earnest by the year 2020. Furthermore, as of 2011, no climate model incorporates the effects of methane released from melting permafrost, suggesting that even the most extreme climate scenarios in the models might not be extreme enough. Carbon A third of the Earth's soil carbon is found in the Arctic tundra soil, stored in frozen organic matter. If the high northern latitudes warm significantly (as they are expected to; see Figure 3), permafrost will thaw, allowing the organic matter within the permafrost to decompose. The decomposition will release carbon into the atmosphere. This already happens within the active layer each summer. As the active layer thaws, some organic matter decomposes. Under normal climate conditions (i.e. a cold arctic region), the ground remains cold enough to keep the decomposition very slow. But as air temperature increases and the ground warms, this process will speed up, and scientists think this could begin very soon. Some suggest the arctic tundra could go from being a carbon sink to a carbon source by the mid-2020s. Researchers at the National Snow and Ice Data Center estimate that by 2200, 60% of the Northern Hemisphere's permafrost will probably be melted, which could release around 190 billion tons of carbon into the atmosphere. This amount is about half of all the carbon released in the industrial age. The affect this will have on the rate of atmospheric warming could be irreversible. At the very least, these estimates mean fossil fuel emissions will have to be reduced more than currently suggested to account for the amount of carbon expected to discharge from melting permafrost. Peatlands are also expected to be impacted by global climate change. Peat is made up of dead organic material, and so is very rich in carbon. It consists of 90% water and 10% plant matter, and is mostly found at the high latitudes of the northern hemisphere, both at the surface and below. Some of this peat is found underneath the permafrost layer, which means the carbon it harbors could be in jeopardy should the permafrost melt. In a study of the world's peatlands, one recent study found that if the globe warms 1\u00b0C over the next few decades, this could lead to a release of 38-100 million tons of carbon per year from peat alone. Methane Figure 3. Methane bubbles. Image credit: Walter et al., 2006. In moist areas, most of the emissions will be of methane, a greenhouse gas that has 20 to 25 times more warming power than carbon dioxide. As the ground warms, methane will either be released directly into the atmosphere or bacteria will break it down into carbon dioxide, which will then be released. If areas of thawed permafrost exist at depth between frozen layers, it's possible that microbial activities will continue unabated, even during the winter, to create new methane from organic material. This is what is believed to be happening around Siberia's lakes. In 2006, researchers working at two northern Siberian lakes found that methane was bubbling up from thawing permafrost at a rate five times faster than originally thought. The study also found an expansion of \"thaw lakes\" in the permafrost regions. Studies conducted in Canadian and Swedish permafrost and peatland regions also show these trends. Methane hydrates can be thought of as methane gas frozen into ice structures, like the one in Figure 5. They're formed at cold temperatures and under high pressure\u2014conditions that are both present beneath layers of frozen permafrost. The amount of methane hydrates in permafrost could range anywhere from 7.5 to 400 billion tons of carbon-equivalent. Methane hydrates are abundantly present in and near the Siberian Ice Complex, or Arctic Shelf, which provides a shelf-like structure to support the land and coastline on top of it. As waters along the northern coast warm, the ice complex melts, allowing for quick erosion compared to the historical rate. In these areas, the water contains 2500% of the methane found in average atmospheric conditions. And recent research shows the amount of methane currently being released from the Arctic Shelf region is around the same amount of methane being released from all the oceans in the world. This is particularly dangerous because of the Shelf's shallow depth. In other regions where methane hydrates exist, they are deep enough to oxidize to carbon dioxide before reaching the surface. In this region, the methane is released directly into the air. The Global Monitoring Division of NOAA's Earth System Research Laboratory allows you to plot time series of various atmospheric gases, including CO2 and CH4. Hunting for methane with Katey Walter Anthony, UAF 2010. University of Alaska Fairbanks Professor Katey Walter Anthony takes us onto a frozen lake in Fairbanks, AK to demonstrate why methane gas has \"exploded\" onto the climate change scene. Figure 4. Structure of a gas hydrate (methane clathrate) block. Image credit: Wikipedia. The Disaster Scenario It's not hard to imagine a disaster scenario surrounding permafrost. As the atmosphere warms, permafrost melts, which releases greenhouse gas, which further warms the atmosphere, which speeds up the permafrost melting, and so on. Currently, climate models do not incorporate the effects of methane released from melting permafrost, which means even the most extreme warming scenarios we've come up with might not be extreme enough. A spike in atmospheric methane concentration could set off catastrophic global warming. David Shindell and Gavin Schmidt (climate scientists of RealClimate) suggest that a real-world disaster scenario would be an instantaneous release of about 10 gigatons carbon-equivalent (gton C) of methane into the atmosphere. Right now, it contains approximately 3.5 gton C of methane. They don't see any way to get more than 1 gton C as methane into the air emitted at one time, fortunately, but the world has seen a massive release of methane in the past: the Paleocene Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM). Studies focusing on this time period estimate that several thousand gton C of methane were released into the atmosphere. But, although it's hard to accurately conclude how long it took for this to happen, current estimates are around a thousand years. In other words, it wasn't immediate. But the warming that is occurring due to anthropogenic climate change is unprecedented in its rate\u2014the world is warming ten times faster today that in did in the PETM. For this reason, it's hard to rule out any disaster global warming scenario. Related Blogs There are no recent blogs on this topic. Resources General Permafrost Links The Basics of Permafrost International Permafrost Association National Snow and Ice Data Center: Permafrost Geological Survey of Canada's Permafrost Page NOAA Near-Realtime Arctic Change Indicator website: Land - Permafrost Permafrost and Climate Change How rapidly is permafrost changing and what are the impacts of these changes? (NOAA) Permafrost: Permafrost and Climate Change (GCS of Canada) Thawing permafrost likely will accelerate global warming, study finds (Science Daily) Earth's permafrost starts to squelch (BBC) Disappearing Arctic Lakes (Science) Greenhouse Gas Emissions From Permafrost Methane bubbling from Siberian thaw lakes as a positive feedback to climate warming (Nature) Methane hydrates and global warming (RealClimate) Potential for Abrupt Changes in Atmospheric Methane (climatescience.gov) Arctic Methane on the move? (RealClimate) Unlocking Arctic Carbon (Discovery News) Climate change and permafrost thaw alter greenhouse gas emissions in northern wetlands (physorg.org) Potential for Abrupt Changes in Atmospheric Methane (climatescience.gov) Carbon respiration from subsurface peat accelerated by climate warming in the Arctic (Nature) Sensitivity of boreal forest carbon balance to soil thaw (Science) Resources Hot Topics Introduction to Climate Change CO2 and the Greenhouse Effect The IPCC Report on Climate Change The Scientific Consensus on Climate Change Hurricanes and Climate Change Extreme Weather Impact of Climate Change on Wildfires Sea Level Rise Arctic Sea Ice Glaciers The Science of Abrupt Climate Change Stratospheric Cooling Ozone Hole Volcanoes PETM: Global Warming, Naturally Heat Mortality Acid Oceans Snow and Ice Arctic Sea Ice Antarctica The Northwest Passage Opens Polar Bears Greenland Permafrost In a Warming World Glaciers Going Green Grocery Shopping Guide Driving Guide Battery Basics Dr. Jeff Masters' Top 10 Climate Change Blogs 1. 2011: Earth's 11th warmest year; where is the climate headed? 2. The Manufactured Doubt industry and the hacked email controversy 3. Our extreme weather: Arctic changes to blame? 4. Tropical Storm Lee's flood in Binghamton: was global warming the final straw? 5. 2010 - 2011: Earth's most extreme weather since 1816? 6. The future of intense winter storms 7. Is the Atlantic hurricane season getting longer? 8. The Biggest Control Knob: CO2 in Earth's Climate History 9. The climate is changing: the Arctic Dipole emerges 10. My worst global warming fear: buckeyes in Ann Arbor The \"Best Of\" Dr. Ricky Rood's Climate Blogs Climate Science and the 2012 Election Definition of Climate: Average versus Accumulation Science, Belief and the Volcano Heat Waves: A Climate Case Study Climate Case Study: The 2010 Russian Heat Wave Essay on Climate Change Opinion Don't Shoot the Messenger More CO2 = Healthier Planet? \"Climategate\" The Manufactured Doubt Industry Is Carbon Dioxide a Pollutant? The Skeptics vs. the Ozone Hole Richard Lindzen's \"Climate of Fear\" Opinions and Anecdotal Evidence Book And Movie Reviews The Hockey Stick and the Climate Wars Into the Storm: A book review Storms of My Grandchildren by Dr. James Hansen The Rough Guide to Climate Change: A book review Extreme Weather: a book review Oscar time for Al Gore's movie Field Notes from a Catastrophe book review Al Gore's An Inconvenient Truth movie review Our Apps About Us Contact Careers Site Map PWS Network Full Screen Weather Feedback & Support Data Rights Privacy Settings Terms of Use Privacy Policy AdChoices Ad Partners Analytics Partners \u00a9 Copyright TWC Product and Technology LLC 2014, 2019", "Speleothems Reveal 500,000-Year History of Siberian Permafrost | Science Skip to main content HomeNewsJournalsTopicsCareers Search Search Toggle menu Search Search Log in My account Contact Us Become a member Renew my subscription Sign up for newsletters . Facebook Twitter Google+ Rss Authors Members Librarians Advertisers HomeRecent VideosLatest PodcastsPhoto GalleriesDance Your Ph.D. ContestData Stories ContestNewsLatest NewsScienceInsiderScienceShotsSifterFrom the MagazineAbout NewsQuizzesJournalsScienceScience AdvancesScience ImmunologyScience RoboticsScience SignalingScience Translational MedicineScience Partner JournalsTopicsAll TopicsSpecial IssuesCustom PublishingCareersArticlesFind JobsCareer ResourcesForumFor EmployersEmployer ProfilesGraduate ProgramsBookletsAdvertising Features Search Search share Report Speleothems Reveal 500,000-Year History of Siberian Permafrost A. Vaks1,*, O. S. Gutareva2, S. F. M. Breitenbach3, E. Avirmed4, A. J. Mason1, A. L. Thomas1, A. V. Osinzev5, A. M. Kononov2, G. M. Henderson11Department of Earth Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3AN, UK.2Institute of Earth\u2019s Crust, Russian Academy of Sciences, Siberian Branch, 128 Lermontova Street, Irkutsk 664033, Russia.3Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Z\u00fcrich (ETH Z\u00fcrich), CH-8092 Z\u00fcrich, Switzerland.4Institute of Geography, Mongolian Academy of Sciences, 210620 UlaanBaatar, Mongolia.5Arabica Speleological Club, Mamin-Sibiryak Street, Box 350, Irkutsk 554082, Russia.\u21b5*Corresponding author. E-mail: anton.vaks{at}earth.ox.ac.uk See allHide authors and affiliations Science\u00a0 12 Apr 2013:Vol. 340, Issue 6129, pp. 183-186DOI: 10.1126/science.1228729 A. VaksDepartment of Earth Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3AN, UK.Find this author on Google Scholar Find this author on PubMed Search for this author on this site For correspondence: anton.vaks@earth.ox.ac.uk O. S. GutarevaInstitute of Earth\u2019s Crust, Russian Academy of Sciences, Siberian Branch, 128 Lermontova Street, Irkutsk 664033, Russia.Find this author on Google Scholar Find this author on PubMed Search for this author on this site S. F. M. BreitenbachSwiss Federal Institute of Technology Z\u00fcrich (ETH Z\u00fcrich), CH-8092 Z\u00fcrich, Switzerland.Find this author on Google Scholar Find this author on PubMed Search for this author on this site E. AvirmedInstitute of Geography, Mongolian Academy of Sciences, 210620 UlaanBaatar, Mongolia.Find this author on Google Scholar Find this author on PubMed Search for this author on this site A. J. MasonDepartment of Earth Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3AN, UK.Find this author on Google Scholar Find this author on PubMed Search for this author on this site A. L. ThomasDepartment of Earth Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3AN, UK.Find this author on Google Scholar Find this author on PubMed Search for this author on this site A. V. OsinzevArabica Speleological Club, Mamin-Sibiryak Street, Box 350, Irkutsk 554082, Russia.Find this author on Google Scholar Find this author on PubMed Search for this author on this site A. M. KononovInstitute of Earth\u2019s Crust, Russian Academy of Sciences, Siberian Branch, 128 Lermontova Street, Irkutsk 664033, Russia.Find this author on Google Scholar Find this author on PubMed Search for this author on this site G. M. HendersonDepartment of Earth Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3AN, UK.Find this author on Google Scholar Find this author on PubMed Search for this author on this site Article Figures & Data Info & Metrics eLetters PDF Log in to view full text via AAAS login AAAS login provides access to Science for AAAS members, and access to other journals in the Science family to users who have purchased individual subscriptions. Become a AAAS member Activate account Add journals Account help Register for free to read this article As a service to the community, this article is available for free. Existing users log in. Become a AAAS member Account help Log in through your institutionLog in via OpenAthens. Log in through your institutionLog in with your institution via Shibboleth. More options Purchase digital access to this article Download and print this article for your personal scholarly, research, and educational use.Purchase this issue in print Buy a single issue of Science for just $15 USD. Science Vol 340, Issue 612912 April 2013 Table of Contents Print Table of Contents Advertising (PDF) Classified (PDF) Masthead (PDF) Article Tools Email Thank you for your interest in spreading the word about Science.NOTE: We only request your email address so that the person you are recommending the page to knows that you wanted them to see it, and that it is not junk mail. We do not capture any email address. Your Email Your Name Send To Enter multiple addresses on separate lines or separate them with commas. You are going to email the following Speleothems Reveal 500,000-Year History of Siberian Permafrost Message Subject (Your Name) has forwarded a page to you from Science Message Body (Your Name) thought you would like to see this page from the Science web site. Your Personal Message Send Message Download Powerpoint Print Save to my folders Log In with your AAAS Login Alerts Please log in to add an alert for this article. Log In with your AAAS Login Sign In to Email Alerts with your Email Address Email Log in Citation tools Speleothems Reveal 500,000-Year History of Siberian Permafrost By A. Vaks, O. S. Gutareva, S. F. M. Breitenbach, E. Avirmed, A. J. Mason, A. L. Thomas, A. V. Osinzev, A. M. Kononov, G. M. Henderson Science12 Apr 2013 : 183-186 Siberian caves recorded the history of permafrost occurrence during the past 450,000 years. Citation Manager Formats BibTeX Bookends EasyBib EndNote (tagged) EndNote 8 (xml) Medlars Mendeley Papers RefWorks Tagged Ref Manager RIS Zotero Share Speleothems Reveal 500,000-Year History of Siberian Permafrost By A. Vaks, O. S. Gutareva, S. F. M. Breitenbach, E. Avirmed, A. J. Mason, A. L. Thomas, A. V. Osinzev, A. M. Kononov, G. M. Henderson Science12 Apr 2013 : 183-186 Siberian caves recorded the history of permafrost occurrence during the past 450,000 years. Share This Article: Copy Related Content Similar Articles in: Citing Articles in: Subjects Atmospheric Science Navigate This Article ArticlePermafrost Thaw PredictionsAbstractSupplementary MaterialsReferences and NotesFigures & DataInfo & MetricseLetters PDF Science 8 March 2019 Vol 363, Issue 6431 Feature Dubious diagnosis Conservation Animal cultures matter for conservation History of Science Nuclear fallout SCI COMMUN News at a glance Solid-State Physics Squeezing strong correlations from graphene Working Life Fighting through the gray Table of Contents About usJournals Leadership Team members Work at AAAS AdvertiseAdvertising kits Custom publishing For subscribersSite license info For members InternationalChinese Japanese HelpAccess & subscriptions Order a Single Issue Reprints & permissions Contact us Accessibility Stay Connected Facebook Twitter GooglePlus RSS Feeds \u00a9 2019 American Association for the Advancement of Science. All rights reserved. AAAS is a partner of\u00a0HINARI,\u00a0AGORA, OARE, CHORUS,\u00a0CLOCKSS,\u00a0CrossRef\u00a0and\u00a0COUNTER.\u00a0Science ISSN 1095-9203. Terms of Service Privacy Policy Contact Us", "Permafrost | geology | Britannica.com ENCYCLOP\u00c6DIA BRITANNICA START YOUR FREE TRIAL Log In \u00b7 Join Demystified Quizzes Galleries Lists On This Day Biographies Newsletters START YOUR FREE TRIAL Search Britannica What are you looking for? Search Click here to search Browse popular topics: Sugar Act Ash Wednesday Nullification crisis Liturgy of the Word K\u00f6ppen climate classification Bring fact-checked results to the top of your browser search. Learn More. Permafrostgeology Written By: Troy L. P\u00e9w\u00e9 See Article History Alternative Title: ground ice Permafrost, perennially frozen ground, a naturally occurring material with a temperature colder than 0 \u00b0C (32 \u00b0F) continuously for two or more years. Such a layer of frozen ground is designated exclusively on the basis of temperature. Part or all of its moisture may be unfrozen, depending on the chemical composition of the water or the depression of the freezing point by capillary forces. Permafrost with saline soil moisture, for example, may be colder than 0 \u00b0C for several years but contain no ice and thus not be firmly cemented. Most permafrost, however, is consolidated by ice.Division of subarctic and Arctic regions showing distribution of permafrost and glaciers.Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica, Inc.Permafrost with no water, and thus no ice, is termed dry permafrost. The upper surface of permafrost is called the permafrost table. In permafrost areas the surface layer of ground that freezes in the winter (seasonally frozen ground) and thaws in summer is called the active layer. The thickness of the active layer depends mainly on the moisture content, varying from less than a foot in thickness in wet, organic sediments to several feet in well-drained gravels.Permafrost forms and exists in a climate where the mean annual air temperature is 0 \u00b0C or colder. Such a climate is generally characterized by long, cold winters with little snow and short, relatively dry, cool summers. Permafrost, therefore, is widespread in the Arctic, sub-Arctic, and Antarctica. It is estimated to underlie 20 percent of the world\u2019s land surface. Read More on This Topic glacial landform: Permafrost, patterned ground, solifluction deposits, and pingos Permafrost is ground that remains perennially frozen (see permafrost). It covers about 20\u201325 percent of the Earth\u2019s land surface today. The \u201cactive layer\u201d of soil close to the surface of permafrost regions undergoes many seasonal and daily freeze-thaw\u2026 Distribution in the Northern Hemisphere Permafrost zones Permafrost is widespread in the northern part of the Northern Hemisphere, where it occurs in 85 percent of Alaska, 55 percent of Russia and Canada, and probably all of Antarctica. Permafrost is more widespread and extends to greater depths in the north than in the south. It is 1,500 metres (5,000 feet) thick in northern Siberia, 740 metres thick in northern Alaska, and thins progressively toward the south. Most permafrost can be differentiated into two broad zones; the continuous and the discontinuous, referring to the lateral continuity of permafrost. In the continuous zone of the far north, permafrost is nearly everywhere present except under the lakes and rivers that do not freeze to the bottom. The discontinuous zone includes numerous permafrost-free areas that increase progressively in size and number from north to south. Near the southern boundary, only rare patches of permafrost have been found to exist. In addition to its widespread occurrence in the Arctic and subarctic areas of the Earth, permafrost also exists at lower latitudes in areas of high elevation. This type of perennially frozen ground is called Alpine permafrost. Although data from high plateaus and mountains are scarce, measurements taken below the active surface layer indicate zones where temperatures of 0 \u00b0C or colder persist for two or more years. The largest area of Alpine permafrost is in western China, where 1,500,000 square kilometres (580,000 square miles) of permafrost are known to exist. In the contiguous United States, Alpine permafrost is limited to about 100,000 square kilometres in the high mountains of the west. Permafrost occurs at elevations as low as 2,500 metres in the northern states and at about 3,500 metres in Arizona. A unique occurrence of permafrost\u2014one that has no analogue on land\u2014lies under the Arctic Ocean, on the northern continental shelves of North America and Eurasia. This is known as subsea or offshore permafrost. Study of permafrost Although the existence of permafrost had been known to the inhabitants of Siberia for centuries, scientists of the Western world did not take seriously the isolated reports of a great thickness of frozen ground existing under northern forest and grasslands until 1836. Then, Alexander Theodor von Middendorff measured temperatures to depths of approximately 100 metres of permafrost in the Shargin shaft, an unsuccessful well dug for the governor of the Russian-Alaskan Trading Company, at Yakutsk, and estimated that the permafrost was 215 metres thick. Since the late 19th century, Russian scientists and engineers have actively studied permafrost and applied the results of their learning to the development of Russia\u2019s north. In a similar way, prospectors and explorers were aware of permafrost in the northern regions of North America for many years, but it was not until after World War II that systematic studies of perennially frozen ground were undertaken by scientists and engineers in the United States and Canada. Since exploitation of the great petroleum resources on the northern continental shelves began in earnest in the 1970s, investigations into subsea permafrost have progressed even more rapidly than have studies of permafrost on land. Alpine permafrost studies had their beginning in the study of rock glaciers in the Alps of Switzerland. Although ice was known to exist in rock glaciers, it was not until after World War II that investigation by geophysical methods clearly demonstrated slow movement of perennial ice\u2014i.e., permafrost. In the 1970s and \u201980s, detailed geophysical work and temperature and borehole examination of mountain permafrost began in Russia, China, and Scandinavia, especially with regard to construction in high mountain and plateau areas. Origin and stability of permafrost Air temperature and ground temperature In areas where the mean annual air temperature becomes colder than 0 \u00b0C, some of the ground frozen in the winter will not be completely thawed in the summer; therefore, a layer of permafrost will form and continue to grow downward gradually each year from the seasonally frozen ground. The permafrost layer will become thicker each winter, its thickness controlled by the thermal balance between the heat flow from the Earth\u2019s interior and that flowing outward into the atmosphere. This balance depends on the mean annual air temperature and the geothermal gradient. The average geothermal gradient is an increase of 1 \u00b0C (1.8 \u00b0F) for every 30 to 60 metres of depth. Eventually the thickening permafrost layer reaches an equilibrium depth at which the amount of geothermal heat reaching the permafrost is on the average equal to that lost to the atmosphere. Thousands of years are required to attain a state of equilibrium where permafrost is hundreds of feet thick. The annual fluctuation of air temperature from winter to summer is reflected in a subdued manner in the upper few metres of the ground. This fluctuation diminishes rapidly with depth, being only a few degrees at 7.5 metres, and is barely detectable at 15 metres. The level of zero amplitude, at which fluctuations are hardly detectable, is 9 to 15 metres. If the permafrost is in thermal equilibrium, the temperature at the level of zero amplitude is generally regarded as the minimum temperature of the permafrost. Below this depth the temperature increases steadily under the influence of heat from the Earth\u2019s interior. The temperature of permafrost at the depth of minimum annual seasonal change varies from near 0 \u00b0C at the southern limit of permafrost to \u221210 \u00b0C (14 \u00b0F) in northern Alaska and \u221213 \u00b0C (9 \u00b0F) in northeastern Siberia. As the climate becomes colder or warmer, but maintaining a mean annual temperature colder than 0 \u00b0C, the temperature of the permafrost correspondingly rises or declines, resulting in changes in the position of the base of permafrost. The position of the top of permafrost will be lowered by thawing when the climate warms to a mean annual air temperature warmer than 0 \u00b0C. The rate at which the base or top of permafrost is changed depends not only on the amount of climatic fluctuation but also on the amount of ice in the ground and the composition of the ground, conditions that in part control the geothermal gradient. If the geothermal gradient is known and if the surface temperature remains stable for a long period of time, it is, therefore, possible to predict from a knowledge of the mean annual air temperature the thickness of permafrost in a particular area that is remote from bodies of water. Climatic change Permafrost is the result of present climate. Many temperature profiles show, however, that permafrost is not in equilibrium with present climate at the sites of measurement. Some areas show, for example, that climatic warming since the last third of the 19th century has caused a warming of the permafrost to a depth of more than 100 metres. In such areas much of the permafrost is a product of a colder, former climate.melting permafrost: avalanchesLearn about researchers studying melting permafrost on mountains in order to predict and protect against avalanches.Contunico \u00a9 ZDF Enterprises GmbH, Mainz The distribution and characteristics of subsea permafrost point to a similar origin. At the height of the glacial epoch, especially about 20,000 years ago, most of the continental shelf in the Arctic Ocean was exposed to polar climates for thousands of years. These climates caused cold permafrost to form to depths of more than 700 metres. Subsequently, within the past 10,000 years, the Arctic Ocean rose and advanced over a frozen landscape to produce a degrading relict subsea permafrost. The perennially frozen ground is no longer exposed to a cold atmosphere, and the salt water has caused a reduction in strength and consequent melting of the ice-rich permafrost (which is bonded by freshwater ice). The temperature of subsea permafrost, near \u22121 \u00b0C (30 \u00b0F), is no longer as low as it was in glacial times and is therefore sensitive to warming from geothermal heat and to the encroaching activities of humans. It is thought that permafrost first occurred in conjunction with the onset of glacial conditions about three million years ago, during the late Pliocene Epoch. In the subarctic at least, most permafrost probably disappeared during interglacial times and reappeared in glacial times. Most existing permafrost in the subarctic probably formed in the cold (glacial) period of the past 100,000 years. Local thickness The thickness and areal distribution of permafrost are directly affected by snow and vegetation cover, topography, bodies of water, the interior heat of the Earth, and the temperature of the atmosphere, as mentioned earlier. Effects of climate The most conspicuous change in thickness of permafrost is related to climate. At Barrow, Alaska, U.S., the mean annual air temperature is \u221212 \u00b0C (10 \u00b0F), and the thickness is 400 metres. At Fairbanks, Alaska, in the discontinuous zone of permafrost in central Alaska, the mean annual air temperature is \u22123 \u00b0C (27 \u00b0F), and the thickness is about 90 metres. Near the southern border of permafrost, the mean annual air temperature is about 0 or \u22121 \u00b0C, and the perennially frozen ground is only a few feet thick. If the mean annual air temperature is the same in two areas, the permafrost will be thicker where the conductivity of the ground is higher and the geothermal gradient is less. A.H. Lachenbruch of the U.S. Geological Survey reports an interesting example from northern Alaska. The mean annual air temperatures at Cape Simpson and Prudhoe Bay are similar, but permafrost thickness is 275 metres at Cape Simpson and about 650 metres at Prudhoe Bay because rocks at Prudhoe Bay are more siliceous and have a higher conductivity and a lower geothermal gradient than rocks at Cape Simpson. Effects of water bodies Bodies of water, lakes, rivers, and the sea have a profound effect on the distribution of permafrost. A deep lake that does not freeze to the bottom during the winter will be underlain by a zone of thawed material. If the minimum horizontal dimension of the deep lake is about twice as much as the thickness of permafrost nearby, there probably exists an unfrozen vertical zone extending all the way to the bottom of permafrost. Such thawed areas extending all the way through permafrost are widespread under rivers and sites of recent rivers in the discontinuous zone of permafrost and under major, deep rivers in the far north. Under the wide floodplains of rivers in the subarctic, the permafrost is sporadically distributed both laterally and vertically. Small, shallow lakes that freeze to the bottom each winter are underlain by a zone of thawed material, but the thawed zone does not completely penetrate permafrost except near the southern border of permafrost. Effects of solar radiation, vegetation, and snow cover Inasmuch as south-facing hillslopes receive more incoming solar energy per unit area than other slopes, they are warmer; permafrost is generally absent on these in the discontinuous zone and is thinner in the continuous zone. The main role of vegetation in permafrost areas is to shield perennially frozen ground from solar energy. Vegetation is an excellent insulating medium and removal or disturbance of it, either by natural processes or by humans, causes thawing of the underlying permafrost. In the continuous zone the permafrost table may merely be lowered by the disturbance of vegetation, but in a discontinuous zone permafrost may be completely destroyed in certain areas. Snow cover also influences heat flow between the ground and the atmosphere and therefore affects the distribution of permafrost. If the net effect of timely snowfalls is to prevent heat from leaving the ground in the cold winter, permafrost becomes warmer. Actually, local differences in vegetation and snowfall in areas of thin and warm permafrost are critical for the formation and existence of the perennially frozen ground. Permafrost is not present in areas of the world where great snow thicknesses persist throughout most of the winter. Ice content Types of ground ice The ice content of permafrost is probably the most important feature of permafrost affecting human life in the north. Ice in the perennially frozen ground exists in various sizes and shapes and has definite distribution characteristics. The forms of ground ice can be grouped into five main types: (1) pore ice, (2) segregated, or Taber, ice, (3) foliated, or wedge, ice, (4) pingo ice, and (5) buried ice. 1. Pore ice, which fills or partially fills pore spaces in the ground, is formed by pore water freezing in situ with no addition of water. The ground contains no more water in the solid state than it could hold in the liquid state. 2. Segregated, or Taber, ice includes ice films, seams, lenses, pods, or layers generally 0.15 to 13 centimetres (0.06 to 5 inches) thick that grow in the ground by drawing in water as the ground freezes. Small ice segregations are the least spectacular but one of the most extensive types of ground ice, and engineers and geologists interested in ice growth and its effect on engineering structures have studied them considerably. Such observers generally accept the principle of bringing water to a growing ice crystal, but they do not completely agree as to the mechanics of the processes. Pore ice and Taber ice occur both in seasonally frozen ground and in permafrost. 3. Foliated ground ice, or wedge ice, is the term for large masses of ice growing in thermal contraction cracks in permafrost. 4. Pingo ice is clear, or relatively clear, and occurs in permafrost more or less horizontally or in lens-shaped masses. Such ice originates from groundwater under hydrostatic pressure. 5. Buried ice in permafrost includes buried sea, lake, and river ice and recrystallized snow, as well as buried blocks of glacier ice in permafrost climate. World estimates of the amount of ice in permafrost vary from 200,000 to 500,000 cubic kilometres (49,000 to 122,000 cubic miles), or less than 1 percent of the total volume of the Earth. It has been estimated that 10 percent by volume of the upper 3 metres of permafrost on the northern Coastal Plain of Alaska is composed of foliated ground ice (ice wedges). Taber ice is the most extensive type of ground ice, and in places it represents 75 percent of the ground by volume. It is calculated that the pore and Taber ice content in the depth between 0.5 and 3 metres (surface to 0.5 metre is seasonally thawed) is 61 percent by volume, and between 3 and 9 metres it is 41 percent. The total amount of pingo ice is less than 0.1 percent of the permafrost. The total ice content in the permafrost of the Arctic Coastal Plain of Alaska is estimated to be 1,500 cubic kilometres, and below 9 metres most of that is present as pore ice. Ice wedges The most conspicuous and controversial type of ground ice in permafrost is that formed in large ice wedges or masses with parallel or subparallel foliation structures. Most foliated ice masses occur as wedge-shaped, vertical, or inclined sheets or dikes 2.5 centimetres to 3 metres wide and 0.3 to 9 metres high when viewed in transverse cross section. Some masses seen on the face of frozen cliffs may appear as horizontal bodies a few centimetres to 3 metres in thickness and 0.3 to 14 metres long, but the true shape of these ice wedges can be seen only in three dimensions. Ice wedges are parts of polygonal networks of ice enclosing cells of frozen ground 3 to 30 metres or more in diameter. Origins The origin of ground ice was first studied in Siberia, and discussions in print of the origin of large ground-ice masses in perennially frozen ground of North America have gone on since Otto von Kotzebue recorded ground ice in 1816 at a spot now called Elephant\u2019s Point in Eschscholtz Bay of Seward Peninsula. The theory for the origin of ice wedges now generally accepted is the thermal contraction theory that, during the cold winter, polygonal thermal contraction cracks, a centimetre or two wide and a few metres deep, form in the frozen ground; then when, in early spring, water from the melting snow runs down these tension cracks and freezes, a vertical vein of ice is produced that penetrates into permafrost; when the permafrost warms and re-expands during the following summer, horizontal compression produces upturning of the frozen sediment by plastic deformation; then during the next winter, renewed thermal tension reopens the vertical ice-cemented crack, which may be a zone of weakness; another increment of ice is added in the spring when meltwater again enters and freezes. Over the years the vertical wedge-shaped mass of ice is produced. Active wedges, inactive wedges, and ice-wedge casts Ice wedges may be classified as active, inactive, and ice-wedge casts. Active ice wedges are those that are actively growing. The wedge may not crack every year, but during many or most years cracking does occur, and an increment of ice is added. Ice wedges require a much more rigorous climate to grow than does permafrost. The permafrost table must be chilled to \u221215 to \u221220 \u00b0C (5 to \u22124 \u00b0F) for contraction cracks to form. On the average, it is assumed that ice wedges generally grow in a climate where the mean annual air temperature is \u22126 or \u22128 \u00b0C (21 or 18 \u00b0F) or colder. In regions with a general mean annual temperature only slightly warmer than \u22126 \u00b0C, ice wedges occasionally form in restricted cold microclimate areas or during cold periods of a few years\u2019 duration. The area of active ice wedges appears to roughly coincide with the continuous permafrost zone. From north to south across the permafrost area in North America, a decreasing number of wedges crack frequently. The line dividing zones of active and inactive ice wedges is arbitrarily placed at the position where it is thought most wedges do not frequently crack. Inactive ice wedges are those that are no longer growing. The wedge does not crack in winter and, therefore, no new ice is added. A gradation between active ice wedges and inactive ice wedges occurs in those wedges that crack rarely. Inactive ice wedges have no ice seam or crack extending from the wedge upward to the surface in the spring. The wedge top may be flat, especially if thawing has lowered the upper surface of the wedge at some time in the past. Ice wedges in the world are of several ages, but none appear older than the onset of the last major cold period, about 100,000 years ago. Wedges dated by radiocarbon analyses range from 3,000 to 32,000 years in age. In many places in the now temperate latitudes of the world, in areas of past permafrost, ice wedges have melted, and resulting voids have been filled with sediments collapsing from above and the sides. These ice-wedge casts are important as paleoclimatic indicators and indicate a climate of the past with at least a mean annual air temperature of \u22126 or \u22128 \u00b0C or colder. Page 1 of 2 Next page Surface manifestations of permafrost and seasonally frozen ground Learn More in these related Britannica articles: glacial landform: Permafrost, patterned ground, solifluction deposits, and pingos Permafrost is ground that remains perennially frozen (see permafrost). It covers about 20\u201325 percent of the Earth\u2019s land surface today. The \u201cactive layer\u201d of soil close to the surface of permafrost regions undergoes many seasonal and daily freeze-thaw\u2026 Canada: Tundra The permafrost (persistently frozen ground) is easily damaged by heavy equipment and by oil spills. The Inuit, who fish, hunt, and trap for a living, are directly affected by abuses of the ecology.\u2026 Arctic: Terrain Permanently frozen ground (permafrost) covers nearly one-quarter of the Earth\u2019s surface. In northern Alaska and Canada scattered observations suggest that permafrost is 800 to 1,500 feet deep; it is generally deeper in northern Siberia. The deepest known permafrost is in northern Siberia, where it exceeds 2,000 feet. The\u2026 North America: Temperature \u2026has permanently frozen subsoil (permafrost) and is under snow and ice most of the year. The frequently frozen seas interlacing the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, together with innumerable northern lakes, allow for an enormous chilling effect on the air above, and the temperatures for these huge regions are 6 to\u2026 global warming: Carbon cycle feedbacks \u2026of the warming of Arctic permafrost (on land) and further methane release at the continental margins of the oceans (a few hundred metres below sea level). The current average atmospheric methane concentration of 1,750 ppb is equivalent to 3.5 gigatons (3.5 billion tons) of carbon. There are at least 400\u2026 ADDITIONAL MEDIAMore About Permafrost14 references found in Britannica articlesAssorted Referenceshydrates In hydrateice formation In ice formationperiglacial landforms In glacial landform: Permafrost, patterned ground, solifluction deposits, and pingosPleistocene Epoch In Pleistocene Epoch: Periglacial environmentspolar barrens and tundra In tundra: Soils In tundra: Effects of human activities and climate change In polar ecosystem: Polar environmentspotential methane emission In global warming: Carbon cycle feedbackspresence in Gelisol In Gelisoltaiga In taiga: SoilsView More Additional Reading Article History Article Contributors Feedback Corrections? Updates? Help us improve this article! Contact our editors with your feedback. Permafrost Quick Facts View Media Page related topicsIce formation Pingo Thermokarst Closed-system pingo Pore ice Hydrolaccolith Active layer High-centre polygon Open-system pingo Subsea permafrost Similar Topics Glacier Iceberg Ice in lakes and rivers Sea ice Polynya Ice jam Pack ice Featured On Britannica Demystified / Society What Is Gaslighting? Quiz / Literature & Language Famous Quotes Demystified / Philosophy & Religion Who Wrote the King James Bible? Quiz / Science Types of Chemical Reactions Britannica Lists & Quizzes Science Quiz Pollution Animals List Gorilla gorilla, Sula sula, and Other Animals Whose Names Are Tautonyms\u2014the Same for Genus and Species Science Quiz Biodiversity Loss History List Military Commanders of World War I Trending Topics Sugar Act Ash Wednesday Nullification crisis Liturgy of the Word K\u00f6ppen climate classification Michelangelo Normandy Invasion Saint Patrick's Day United States House of Representatives Seats by State Yalta Conference Connect with Britannica Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Pinterest IntroductionDistribution in the Northern HemispherePermafrost zonesStudy of permafrostOrigin and stability of permafrostAir temperature and ground temperatureClimatic changeLocal thicknessEffects of climateEffects of water bodiesEffects of solar radiation, vegetation, and snow coverIce contentTypes of ground iceIce wedgesOriginsActive wedges, inactive wedges, and ice-wedge castsSurface manifestations of permafrost and seasonally frozen groundAreas underlain by permafrostPolygonal groundThermokarst formationsPingosFeatures related to seasonal frostPatterned groundSoil flowProblems posed by permafrostPermafrost engineeringGeneral issuesPermafrost thawing and frost heavingDevelopment in permafrost areasStructures on pilesHighways and railroadsAgricultureOffshore structures Edit Mode Permafrost Geology Tips for Editing Leave Edit Mode Submit Tips For Editing We welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. You can make it easier for us to review and, hopefully, publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind. Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience. You may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered. Any text you add should be original, not copied from other sources. At the bottom of the article, feel free to list any sources that support your changes, so that we can fully understand their context. (Internet URLs are the best.) Your contribution may be further edited by our staff, and its publication is subject to our final approval. Unfortunately, our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions. Submit Thank You for Your Contribution! Our editors will review what you've submitted, and if it meets our criteria, we'll add it to the article. Please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors, and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed. Uh Oh There was a problem with your submission. Please try again later. Close Keep Exploring Britannica Volcano Volcano, vent in the crust of the Earth or another planet or satellite, from which issue eruptions of\u2026 Read this Article Marketing Marketing, the sum of activities involved in directing the flow of goods and services from producers\u2026 Read this Article English language English language, West Germanic language of the Indo-European language family that is closely related\u2026 Read this Article View More Stay Connected Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Pinterest Newsletters About Us About Our Ads Partner Program Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use \u00a92019 Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica, Inc. Menu Home Demystified Quizzes Galleries Lists On This Day Biographies Newsletters Login Join Contents Contents Page 1 of 2 Permafrost geology Article Media Print Print Please select which sections you would like to print: Table Of Contents Cite Share SHARE Facebook Twitter Feedback Feedback Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login). Select feedback type: Select a type (Required) Factual Correction Spelling/Grammar Correction Link Correction Additional Information Other Submit Feedback If you prefer to suggest your own revision of the article, you can go to edit mode (requires login). Thank you for your feedback Our editors will review what you\u2019ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. Join Britannica's Publishing Partner Program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work! Share SHARE Facebook Twitter Search \u00d7 close Britannica Celebrates 100 Women Trailblazers", "IMO's Involvement in WMO's Global Cryosphere Watch | News | Icelandic Meteorological office Navigation. Yellow alert\u00a0\u00a0for weather: South Iceland \u00a0 More News GCW Steering Group Committee, 2018. Norwegian Meteorological Institute. IMO's Involvement in WMO's Global Cryosphere Watch 25.1.2018 Three years ago, the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) approved the implementation of the Global Cryosphere Watch (GCW) as a cross-cutting mechanism to bring together international observations and research on the past, present, and future state of the world's cryosphere. Its data products and services are intended to support scientific progress and environmental policy developments related to the cryosphere, which includes snow cover, glaciers, ice caps, permafrost, sea ice, freshwater ice and icebergs around the globe.Among the GCW's chief functions are the standardization of best practices, access to data, and coordination of research activities in the development of its global cryospheric observation network, called the CryoNet. Much of this development builds on existing programs and observations among a community of cryospheric scientists and organizations. Tapping into the WMO Information System (WIS) as part of WMO's Integrated Global Observing System (WIGOS), the GCW also contributes fundamentally to the Global Earth Observation System of Systems (GEOSS) and the Global Framework for Climate Services (GFCS). For a 7.5 min video overview of the GCW, see here .At the beginning of this month, from January 8th to 12th, WMO held the 5th session of its Steering Group for the GCW in Oslo, Norway. At this stage, the GCW is operationalizing the data interface between CryoNet Stations and the GCW Data Portal, hosted by the Norwegian Meteorological Institute, which will enable retrieval of cryospheric observations from CryoNet stations by anyone who can access the Data Portal. In the meantime, over 30 new stations from 12 different countries have been added to the existing network of 120 stations in the CryoNet . Terminology for the classification framework has been clarified, and underway for 2022 is a compilation of a GCW Best Practices Guide that covers measurements of all cryospheric components.IMO director \u00c1rni Snorrason chairs the GCW Steering Group, and IMO glaciologist Thorsteinn Thorsteinsson co-chairs the Best Practices team and serves on the CryoNet Development team. From October to December, IMO intern Ald\u00eds Elfarsd\u00f3ttir contributed to the evaluation of candidate stations and global participation in the CryoNet, glacier best practices, and the compilation of scientific literature on observations of permafrost, freshwater ice, and ice sheets. These tasks took place in collaboration with GCW Project Manager, Rodica Nitu, GCW Website and Outreach Team Lead, Jeff Key, CryoNet Team Chair, Wolfgang Sch\u00f6ner, and IMO glaciologist, Thorsteinn Thorsteinsson. IMO's contributions were incorporated with other progress updates at the recent GCW Steering Group meeting in Oslo.Session at the GCW meeting which was held on the premises\u00a0of the Norwegian Meteorological Institute in Oslo. Photo: \u00deorsteinn \u00deorsteinsson.Participants visiting the forecasting room at met.no. Photo: \u00deorsteinn \u00deorsteinsson. News 2019 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 You are here: Home > About IMO > News en.vedur.is HomeWeatherEarthquakesHydrologyAvalanchesClimatologySea icePollutionAbout IMO About IMO NewsMissionOrganisational chartPublicationsOffice hours and locationContactStaff membersVacanciesServicesArctic cooperationProjectsAbout the web Search Search string Contact IMO \u00a9 Ve\u00f0urstofa \u00cdslands | B\u00fasta\u00f0avegi 7- 9 | 108 Reykjav\u00edk | Phone 522 6000 | Fax: 522 6001 Recording 902 0600 | SSN 630908-0350 Contact us | Employees | Terms and conditions | Sitemap Weather app Ve\u00f0urstofa \u00cdslands on Facebook Ve\u00f0urstofa \u00cdslands \u00e1 Twitter Quality management certified Accessibility certification for priority level 1. Accessibility certification for priority level 2. Other related web sites Icelandic Mobile web This website is built with Eplica CMS", "INVICTUS AND CANNAMERICA PROVIDE UPDATE ON HEMP AND CBD JOINT VENTURE TSX Venture Exchange:GENE GlobeNewswire Contact Us Register Sign In English Fran\u00e7ais INVICTUS AND CANNAMERICA PROVIDE UPDATE ON HEMP AND CBD JOINT VENTURE Email Print Friendly Share March 07, 2019 15:05 ET | Source: Invictus Vancouver, BC, March 07, 2019 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- INVICTUS MD STRATEGIES CORP. (\"Invictus\" or the \"Company\") (TSXV: GENE; OTCQX: IVITF; FRA: 8IS1) is pleased to provide an update on its binding letter of intent to create a joint venture with Cannamerica Brands Corp. (CSE: CANA) (OTCQB: CNNXF) and CBDistribution Company Ltd. (collectively, the \u201cJoint Venture\u201d) that was previously announced on January 7, 2019, with the intention of acquiring hemp biomass for extraction into CBD isolate using purpose-built facilities for large scale CBD extraction. The transaction is anticipated to close on or before March 31, 2019. Each of the parties involved have received approval from their respective Board of Directors to enter into the Joint Venture. Once the transaction is closed, the Joint Venture will mark the Company\u2019s entry into the CBD market in the United States. The Joint Venture will no longer be purchasing eighty percent (80%) of the membership interests of Z3 Sciences, LLC, as previously announced on January 16, 2019, due to a mutual decision made by all parties involved. Invictus has also granted 450,000 incentive stock options to certain consultants of the Company. Each stock option has an exercise price of $0.95 and is exercisable into one common share of the Company. The options vest immediately and are exercisable over a period of five years. The stock options were granted subject to the terms and conditions of the Company\u2019s Stock Option Plan. For more information, please visit www.invictus-md.com. On Behalf of the Board,George E. KvetonChief Executive Officer and Director Jessica MartinVice President, Public Relations and Regulatory Affairs(833) 879-4363 About Invictus Invictus is a global cannabis company offering a selection of products under a wide range of brands. Our integrated route-to-customer approach is defined by five pillars of sales and distribution including medical, adult-use recreational, retail, Licensed Producer to Licensed Producer and international.\u00a0 Invictus has partnered with business leaders to convey our corporate vision, including KISS music legend and business mogul Gene Simmons as our Chief Evangelist Officer. To meet growing demand, Invictus is expanding its cultivation footprint, with three cannabis production facilities licensed under the Cannabis Act and Cannabis Regulations in Canada. To accommodate domestic and international sales, Invictus\u2019 wholly-owned subsidiary, Acreage Pharms Ltd., is well advanced in building its Phase 3 purpose-built cultivation facility to be European Union Good Manufacturing Practices compliant. The Company is targeting for up to 50 percent of its production to comprise medical cannabis. To ensure consistency in quality and supply, Invictus participates in all aspects of the growing process through its subsidiary, Future Harvest Development Ltd., a high-quality fertilizer and nutrients manufacturer. Invictus drives sustainable long-term shareholder value through a diversified product portfolio with over 70 Health Canada approved strains and a multifaceted distribution strategy including medical, adult-use, international, Licensed Producer to Licensed Producer and retail stores. For more information visit www.invictus-md.com. About CannAmerica Brands Corp.\u00a0 CannAmerica Brands is a U.S. marine veteran founded and operated portfolio of cannabis brands with licensing agreements in the states of Colorado, Nevada and Maryland. The Company aims to maximize the value of its brands by employing strong brand management teams, marketing and licensing the brands through various distribution channels, including dispensaries, wholesalers and distributors, in the United States and internationally. The Company\u2019s core strategy is to enhance and monetize the global reach of its existing brands, and to pursue additional strategic acquisitions to grow the scope and diversity of its brand portfolio. For more information, please visit www.cannamericabrands.com Neither the TSX Venture Exchange nor its Regulation Services Provider accepts responsibility for the adequacy or accuracy of this release. Cautionary Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements: This release includes certain statements and information that may constitute forward-looking information within the meaning of applicable Canadian securities laws or forward-looking statements within the meaning of the United States Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. All statements in this news release, other than statements of historical facts, including statements regarding future estimates, plans, objectives, timing, assumptions or expectations of future performance, including that the Joint Venture transaction is anticipated to be completed on or before March 31, 2019 and that the Joint Venture Transaction is expected to close as anticipated by management are forward-looking statements and contain forward-looking information. Generally, forward-looking statements and information can be identified by the use of forward-looking terminology such as \"intends\" or \"anticipates\", or variations of such words and phrases or statements that certain actions, events or results \"may\", \"could\", \"should\", \"would\" or \"occur\". Forward-looking statements are based on certain material assumptions and analysis made by the Company and the opinions and estimates of management as of the date of this press release, including that the Joint Venture transaction will be completed on or before March 31, 2019 and that the Joint Venture transaction will close as anticipated by management.\u00a0 These forward-looking statements are subject to known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause the actual results, level of activity, performance or achievements of the Company to be materially different from those expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements or forward-looking information. Important factors that may cause actual results to vary, include, without limitation, that the Joint Venture transaction will not be completed on or before March 31, 2019, that the Joint Venture transaction will not be completed as expected by management and that there is no guarantee the Joint Venture transaction will close at all.\u00a0 Although management of the Company has attempted to identify important factors that could cause actual results to differ materially from those contained in forward-looking statements or forward-looking information, there may be other factors that cause results not to be as anticipated, estimated or intended. There can be no assurance that such statements will prove to be accurate, as actual results and future events could differ materially from those anticipated in such statements. Accordingly, readers should not place undue reliance on forward-looking statements and forward-looking information. Readers are cautioned that reliance on such information may not be appropriate for other purposes. The Company does not undertake to update any forward-looking statement, forward-looking information or financial out-look that are incorporated by reference herein, except in accordance with applicable securities laws. Jessica Martin Invictus (833) 879-4363 jessica@invictus-md.com Related Articles More articles issued by Invictus More articles related to: Company Announcement Profile Invictus Subscribe via RSS Subscribe via ATOM Javascript White Rock, British Columbia, CANADA http://invictus-md.com Contact Data Jessica Martin Invictus (833) 879-4363 jessica@invictus-md.com Contact With a Reader Account, it's easy to send email directly to the contact for this release. Sign up today for your free Reader Account! Already have an account? Log in here. Media Files Invictus Logo LOGO URL | Copy the link below Formats available: Original Medium Small Tags cannabis marijuana joint venture partnership hemp Newswire Distribution Network & Management Home Newsroom RSS Feeds Legal About Us GlobeNewswire is one of the world's largest newswire distribution networks, specializing in the delivery of corporate press releases financial disclosures and multimedia content to the media, investment community, individual investors and the general public. \u00a9 2019 GlobeNewswire, Inc. All Rights Reserved.", "blue cross denial code 252 \u2013 Medicareicode.net Medicareicode.net This website is a private website. blue cross denial code 252 April 29, 2018 admin AARP health insurance plans Medicare replacement AARP MedicareRx Plans United Healthcare medicare benefits medicare coverage medicare part d medicare part b blue cross denial code 252 PDF download: Claim Adjustment Reason Codes and Remittance \u2026 \u2013 Mass.gov Jan 1, 2018 \u2026 Claim Adjustment Reason Codes and Remittance Advice Remark Codes ( CARCs and RARCs)\u2013Effective 01/01/2018. EOB. CODE. EOB CODE DESCRIPTION. ADJUSTMENT. REASON CODE. ADJUSTMENT REASON CODE DESCRIPTION. REMARK. CODE. REMARK CODE DESCRIPTION. 0201. 2017-2018 Influenza (Flu) Resources for Health Care \u2026 \u2013 CMS.gov Sep 21, 2017 \u2026 Payment Rates for 2017-2018. MLN Matters SE17026. Related CR N/A. Each year, CMS updates the Medicare Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System . (HCPCS) and Current Procedure Terminology (CPT) codes and payment rates for personal flu and pneumococcal vaccines. Payment allowance\u00a0\u2026 Pulmonary Rehabilitation (PR) Services \u2013 JA6823 \u2013 CMS.gov May 7, 2010 \u2026 Medicare will deny claims for HCPCS code G0424 performed in other than and billed without POS 11 or 22, using the following: \u2022 Claim Adjustment Reason Code (CARC) 58 \u2013 \u201cTreatment was deemed by the payer to have been rendered in an inappropriate or invalid place of service. Note: Refer to the 835\u00a0\u2026 2018 Medicare Supplement Premium Comparison Guide \u2013 Illinois.gov State of Illinois. Illinois Department on Aging. 2017 \u2013 2018. Medicare Supplement Premium. Comparison Guide. Chicago Area. (UPDATED). This project was supported in \u2026. should be able to purchase a Medigap policy from Blue Cross/ Blue Shield or \u2026 additional information about these plans, call SHIP at 1-800-252 -8966. 2017 Summer Enrollment Active Employee Guide \u2013 Employees \u2026 Jul 28, 2017 \u2026 On September 1, 2017, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Texas (BCBSTX) will become the \u2026 with a BCBSTX Personal Health Assistant by calling (800) 252\u2013 8039. \u2026. You do not have to meet a deductible amount before the plan begins to pay if your provider is in the. HealthSelect network. 2018 Deductible. Much of what we currently know about the large scale variability of \u2026 Authors: Josefino C. Comiso, Cryospheric Sciences Branch, Code 614.1, NASA Goddard Space. Flight Center \u2026. in the Antarctic, it is rarely the case that an ice floe is older than 2 years, the reason being that the \u2026. the extents derived from SSM/I data (in blue) are consistently higher than those from AMSR-E data (in red) \u2026 Permeable Surface Corrections for Ffowcs Williams and Hawkings \u2026 R=20050182105 2018-01-05T16:54:26+00:00Z \u2026.. The reason for the difference between the upstream and downstream directions is unclear, but use of the correction should clearly be restricted to low \u2026 CFD solution using the code CFL3D.22, 23 CFL3D was developed at NASA Langley Research Center to solve the 3-D,. Adapting to the Changing Health Insurance Landscape \u2013 cloudfront.net 2018 with premium increases (Florida Blue, 2015). The fee funds the premium \u2026. Ohio Revised Code, Chapter 3314, to be considered a \u201cpublic employer\u201d for the purpose of the SERB survey, a municipal \u2026. One potential underlying reason why public entities may join health benefit consortia is to enable them to expand the\u00a0\u2026 DE 2320 \u2013 EDD \u2013 State of California Last day worked and the reason you're no longer working (laid off, quit, fired, or left work because of a \u2026.. For information on how the UI code is applied, including current case studies, see the Benefit Determination \u2026. Page 13 of 19. Benefit Audits. The EDD conducts audits by cross-referencing employer information with. CSEWG 2016 Minutes \u2013 Office of Scientific and Technical \u2026 Nov 14, 2016 \u2026 252Cf; others o 3He(n,p) coherent scattering length measurement in process o For new version of standards, including other measurements: \u25ab 1H(n,n) at \u2026.. o Processing code. \u25ab RR reconstruction, URR prob. tables, \u2026 \u25ab Cross check processing codes (PREPRO, NJOY, GRUCON). \u25ab Reich-Moore formalism\u00a0\u2026 wioa state plan for the state of new york \u2013 US Department of Education Jan 28, 2016 \u2026 252. VII. Program-Specific Requirements For Combined State Plan Partner Programs \u2026\u2026\u2026\u2026\u2026\u2026. 323. Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) . \u2026. WIOA separates the strategic and operational elements to facilitate cross\u2013 program \u2026. Occupational Code (SOC) Occupational Title Share of Industry Employment %. Final Copy of Consolidated Blue Shield Financial Statements \u2013 ahcccs Mar 7, 2014 \u2026 We have audited the accompanying consolidated financial statements of Blue Shield of California \u2026. The Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association licenses Blue Shield of California to offer certain products \u2026. The Company estimates risk adjustment revenues based upon the diagnosis data submitted to. Primary and Secondary School Roll Projections from 2016/17 to \u2026 Appendix 5: 16-18 years cross border movement . \u2026. 6.2 Capacity (PANs) shown as the blue-green area in Figure 2 now includes the two proposed permanent \u2026. 2018. City of London Academy free school (60 places) due to open in 2017. Immediate shortfall of places to be met by planning area 2. Additional spaces remain. 2014 Annual Report \u2013 Southern Cross University Apr 21, 2015 \u2026 In 2014 Southern Cross University celebrated 20 years as a University, marking this significant milestone \u2026. to 252 in 2014. SCU International continued to make regular adjustments to its operations to reflect changing market conditions, as part of its ongoing \u2026.. by the Rous Water Blue and Green. Business\u00a0\u2026 Agenda \u2013 Kingborough Council Jul 10, 2017 \u2026 DAS-2017-11 \u2013 Development Application for Boundary Adjustment Between \u2026 Community Grants Round 1 2017/2018 \u2026 Climate Action 21 \u2013 Tasmania's Climate Change Action Plan 2017 \u2013 2021. 252. Environmental Services Quarterly Report. 253. Confirmation of Items to be Dealt With in Closed Session. Psychology Internship Program \u2013 Durham VA Health Care System Dec 7, 2017 \u2026 Greenville, NC 27834. (252) 830-2149 http://www.durham.va.gov/locations/ Greenville.asp. MATCH Number: 242311. Applications Due: December 7, 2017 \u2026 APPIC Program Code number: 242311 \u2026 For academic year 2018 \u2013 2019, the Internship Program training year begins on August 6, 2018. Advanced Video Technologies LLC v. HTC Corp. \u2013 Federal Circuit Decided: January 11, 2018 \u2026.. Blue Cross of Cal., 99. Cal. Rptr. 2d 809, 815 (Cal. Ct. App. 2000). In this in- stance, the \u2026\u2026 absent or inactive. See id. (\u201cThe reason for requiring an action to be prosecuted in the name of the real parties in interest ( Code Civ. Proc., \u00a7 367) is to save the defendants from a multiplicity of suits . VHHH AD 2.22 Flight Procedures \u2013 Hong Kong Aeronautical \u2026 Mar 2, 2017 \u2026 engine thrust will be required during engine start, (e.g. cross-bleed start procedure), \u2026 \u201cUNABLE RNP 1 [DUE TO (reason)]\u201d as soon as possible. \u2026 4 January 2018. AIP HONG KONG. Civil Aviation Department Hong Kong. 2.2.3.5 Hong Kong SID Contingency Procedures for aircraft with exemption from\u00a0\u2026 Posted in Medicare PDFTagged 252, blue, code, cross, denial Post navigation bipap therapy for copdbilling part b claims You May Like * pr204 blue cross denial code * medicare blue cross plan 65 * federal blue cross payer id * durable medical equipment blue cross * dental medical code cross reference * blue cross provider id numbers * blue cross cpt codes lookup * blue cross alpha prefix lookup * blue cross blue shield 2018 formulary * blue cross provider specialty codes Search for: Recent Posts welcome to medicare labs 2019 what are lcd edits 2019 welcome to medicare visit requirements 2019 what costs does medicare cover 2019 wellcare prescription drug plan 2019 Archives March 2019 February 2019 January 2019 December 2018 November 2018 October 2018 September 2018 August 2018 July 2018 June 2018 May 2018 April 2018 Categories Medicare PDF \u00a9 2019 | Developed by CtrSpace. Proudly powered by WordPress", "| National Snow and Ice Data Center Skip to main content National Snow and Ice Data Center Home Data Data Sets for Research Brightness Temperature Glaciers Ice Sheets Permafrost Sea Ice Soil Moisture Snow ...search for more Scientific Data Search Support for Researchers Analysis & Imaging Tools Data Announcements Submit Your Data Data Policies User Support Data for Everyone Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Glacier Photograph Collection Greenland Ice Sheet Today MASIE (Daily sea ice extent) Satellite Observations of Arctic Change Sea Ice Index Virtual Globes: Google Earth Sponsored Programs Antarctic Glaciological Data Center Exchange for Local Observations and Knowledge of the Arctic (ELOKA) NOAA at NSIDC NASA Distributed Active Archive Center at NSIDC (NSIDC DAAC) Looking for facts and information? See About the Cryosphere. Research Scientists Research Grants Scientific Publications Informatics Research NSIDC Scientific Expeditions On Thin Ice: Expedition to a Crumbling Ice Shelf Scientists blog from Antarctica and provide a glimpse of what it's like to do research in the field. Read their blog ... News For the Media Newsroom: For the Media For Data Users Data Announcements The Drift Current Conditions Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Greenland Today Satellite Observations of Arctic Change NSIDC In the News Events NSIDC Monthly Highlights Icelights: Answers to your burning questions about ice and climate What's hot in the news around climate and sea ice and what are scientists talking about now? Read more... About About NSIDC NSIDC People Our Sponsors Jobs NSIDC Monthly Highlights Use & Copyright Contact Us Support NSIDC NSIDC's Green Data Center About the Cryosphere Quick Facts All About The Cryosphere All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Frozen Ground All About Sea Ice All About Arctic Climatology & Meteorology Snow, Ice and Climate Change Studying the Cryosphere Photo Gallery Educational Resources Cryosphere Glossary What is the Cryosphere? When scientists talk about the cryosphere, they mean the places on Earth where water is in its solid form, frozen into ice or snow. Read more ... Web pagesData Sets Cryosphere Glossary - Choose a Topic - climatology and meteorology freshwater ice frozen ground or permafrost glaciers icebergs and ice shelves ice sheets sea ice snow Search the Glossary: A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P | Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z | all ablation(1) combined processes (such as sublimation, fusion or melting, evaporation) which remove snow or ice from the surface of a glacier or from a snow-field; also used to express the quantity lost by these processes (2) reduction of the water equivalent of a snow cover by melting, evaporation, wind and avalanches. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorologyglacierssnow ablation areathe area of a glacier where more glacier mass is lost than gained.Topic:\u00a0glaciers ablation hollowsdepressions in the snow surface caused by the sun or warm, gusty wind.Topic:\u00a0glaciers ablation morainemound or layer of moraine in the ablation zone of a glacier; the rock has been plucked from the mountainside by the moving glacier and is melting out on the ice surface.Topic:\u00a0glaciers ablation seasonperiod during which glaciers lose more mass than they gain; usually coincides with summer.Topic:\u00a0glaciers ablation zonearea or zone of a glacier where snow and ice ablation exceed accumulation. Topic:\u00a0glaciers absolute differencethe difference, taken without regard to sign, between the values of two variables absolute errorthe difference between the measured or inferred value of a quantity and its actual value. absolute humidity(1) the ratio of the mass of water vapor to the volume occupied by a mixture of water vapor and dry air (2) mass of water contained in a unit volume of moist air. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology accretiongrowth of a cloud or precipitation particle by the collision and union of a frozen particle (ice crystal or snowflake) with a super-cooled liquid droplet which freezes on impact. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology accumulationall processes by which snow or ice are added to a glacier, this is typically the accumulation of snow, which is slowly transformed into ice; other accumulation processes can include avalanches, wind-deposited snow, and the freezing of rain within the snow pack.Topic:\u00a0glaciersclimatology and meteorologysnow accumulation areaarea of a glacier where more mass is gained than lost.Topic:\u00a0glaciers accumulation seasonperiod during which a glacier gains more mass than it loses; usually coincides with winter.Topic:\u00a0glaciers accumulation zonearea of a glacier where more mass is gained than lost.Topic:\u00a0glaciers accuracythe extent to which the readings of an instrument approach the true value of the calculated or measured quantities, supposing that all possible corrections are applied. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology acid precipitationrain or snow containing acidic substances, resulting from the atmospheric pollution mainly with sulfur and nitrogen; acid precipitation has a lower pH than unpolluted rain. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology active air-cooled thermal pilea foundation pile on which a cold air refrigeration system has been installed to remove heat from the ground. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active construction methods in permafrostspecial design and construction methods used for engineering works in permafrost areas where permafrost degradation cannot be prevented.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active ice wedgean ice wedge that is growing as a result of repeated (but not necessarily annual) winter cracking.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active layerthe layer of ground that is subject to annual thawing and freezing in areas underlain by permafrost; also known as seasonal frost. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active liquid refrigerant pilea foundation pile on which a liquid coolant refrigeration system has been installed to remove heat from the ground.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active rock glaciera mass of rock fragments and finer material, on a slope, that contains either an ice core or interstitial ice, and shows evidence of present movement.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrostglaciers active thermokarstthe process by which characteristic landforms are currently developing as a result of thawing of ice-rich permafrost or melting of massive ice. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active-layer failurea general term referring to several forms of slope failures or failure mechanisms commonly occurring in the active layer overlying permafrost. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active-layer thicknessthe thickness of the layer of the ground that is subject to annual thawing and freeing in areas underlain by permafrost.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost adfreeze strengththe tensile or shear strength which has to be overcome to separate two objects that are bonded together by ice.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost adfreeze/adfreezingthe process by which two objects are bonded together by ice formed between them.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost advancewhen a mountain glacier's terminus extends farther downvalley than before; glacial advance occurs when a glacier flows downvalley faster than the rate of ablation at its terminus. Topic:\u00a0glaciers advectionthe horizontal transfer of air mass properties by the velocity field of the atmosphere. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology advection fogfog which forms in the lower part of a warm moist air mass moving over a colder surface (land or water). Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology aerosolnon-gaseous substances, divided into solid particles or liquid droplets, held in suspension in the atmosphere. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology aggradational icethe additional ground ice formed as a direct result of permafrost aggradation. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost air freezing indexthe cumulative number of degree-days below 0\u00b0 C for the air temperature during a given time period.Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorologyfrozen ground or permafrost air massan extensive body of the atmosphere in which physical properties, particularly temperature and humidity, exhibit only small and continuous differences in the horizontal plane; it may extend over an area of several million square kilometers and over a height of several kilometers. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology air temperaturethe ambient temperature indicated by a thermometer exposed to the air but sheltered from direct solar radiation, or placed in an instrument shelter 1.5 to two meters above ground; also called surface temperature. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology air thawing indexthe cumulative number of degree-days above 0\u00b0C for the air temperature during a given period.Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorologyfrozen ground or permafrost Pages1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 \u2026 next \u203a last \u00bb Find Data Search NSIDC Data NASA Earthdata Search IceBridge Portal Data Collections List Stay Current Arctic Sea Ice News and Analysis Sea Ice Index (Passive microwave satellite data) MASIE (Daily sea ice extent, multi-source) Greenland Today Newsroom Learn About Snow and Ice Icelights: Answers to Your Questions Cryosphere Quick Facts All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Sea Ice Arctic Climatology - A Primer Get Help Knowledge Base Etc. Use & Copyright Web Policy Jobs Home | Contact Us\u00a9 2019, National Snow and Ice Data Center :: Advancing knowledge of Earth's frozen regions", "Cryospheric processes | tutor2u Geography tutor2u Subjects Events Job board Shop Company Support Main menu Cart Account Sign in Sign up Our Subjects \u203a Business \u203a Economics \u203a English \u203a Geography \u203a History \u203a Law \u203a Maths \u203a PE \u203a Politics \u203a Psychology \u203a Sociology \u203a Religious Studies Specialist Channels \u203a The Professional Teacher \u203a Beyond the Bike Homepage Our Subjects Business Economics English Geography History Law Maths PE Politics Psychology Sociology Religious Studies Specialist Channels The Professional Teacher Beyond the Bike Events Job Board Shop Company Support Geography Explore Geography Search Go Explore Blog Reference Library Collections Shop Events Jobs Geography Reference library Geography Explore Overview What's new Topics Watch now Blog Reference Library Collections Shop Events Jobs Study notes Cryospheric processes Levels: AS, A Level Exam boards: AQA, Edexcel, OCR, IB, Eduqas, WJEC Print page Share: Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on Linkedin Share on Google Share by email Cryospheric processes are the processes involving ice sheets and glaciers. Past events and their impact on cryospheric processes: The last ice advance (60 000 \u2013 20 000 BCE) led to an increase in glacial accumulation (snowfall and increased ice coverage providing extra snow to glaciers and ice sheets) so the global cryospheric store was considerably larger at this point. Global sea level dropped at the same time; by about 120 m at the ice-maximum, although this was a relatively small proportion of total ocean storage. Future events and their impact on cryospheric processesThe accumulation to glaciers and ice sheets (avalanches and snowfall) can vary depending upon global climate change. Recent warming of global climate has reduced accumulation and increased ablation (output) levels. Large volumes of summer meltwater and a reduction in winter accumulation has led to lower storage levels in global ice sheets and glaciers. In some areas of the world, for example in northern Bangladesh, the potential long-term risk is that the glaciers in the Himalayas that feed many of the rivers in the country, will melt completely and then important water supplies will disappear with catastrophic effects for farmers in the country. The impact on drainage basins across the world is potentially very serious, with seasonal river levels dropping due to a lack of meltwater from individual mountain glaciers. Hill slope changes will occur also as individual glaciers will melt completely, depositing their encased material as moraines. Subscribe to email updates from tutor2u Geography Join 1000s of fellow Geography teachers and students all getting the tutor2u Geography team's latest resources and support delivered fresh in their inbox every morning. Subscribe Thanks. You're now subscribed to receive email updates! You can also follow @tutor2uGeog on Twitter, subscribe to our YouTube channel, or join our popular Facebook Groups. Job board Exam markers for GCSE and A-level Geography \u2013 Apply now AQA, Home Print page Share: Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on Linkedin Share on Google Share by email Geography Study notes Cryospheric processes Glacial processes Andy Day Andy recently finished being a classroom geographer after 35 years at two schools in East Yorkshire as head of geography, head of the humanities faculty and director of the humanities specialism. He has written extensively about teaching and geography - with articles in the TES, Geography GCSE Wideworld and Teaching Geography. You might also like How Feedbacks within and Between the Water & Carbon Cycles Links to Climate Change Study notes Glacial Systems - Variations between Accumulation and Ablation and Feedback Cycles Study notes Glacial Systems - the Glacial Budget Study notes Glacial Systems - Introduction to The Glacial System Study notes Cold Environments Revision quizzes GCSE Geography Revision Quiz - Glaciation Revision quizzes More Study notes Deforestation Study notes Characteristics of the rural-urban fringe Study notes The Demographic Transition Model (DTM) Study notes Human Intervention in the Carbon Cycle and Mitigating the Impacts of Climate Change Study notes How Changes in the Water & Carbon Cycles Can Have Implications for Life on Earth Study notes How Feedbacks within and Between the Water & Carbon Cycles Links to Climate Change Study notes Natural Resource Issues - Mineral Ores Study notes Geopolitics of Energy Study notes Energy Trade Study notes Energy - Nuclear Study notes All Study notes \u203a Teacher Conferences Geography Teacher National Conference 2019 Join us for the inaugural Geography Teacher National Conference 2019! Not to be missed! KEYNOTE SESSIONS WITH: Professor Iain Stewart | Mark Enser | Safia Minney Learn more \u203a Geography Teacher National Conference 2019 Exam Workshops for Students AQA A Level Geography Grade Booster Workshops Our AQA A Level Geography Grade Booster workshops are designed to provide essential revision support to all AQA A Level Geography students as they complete their preparation for the two... Learn more \u203a AQA A Level Geography Grade Booster Workshops Popular Content 10 Hazards Revision Study Notes for A Level & IB Geography Collections 17 Water and Carbon Cycles Revision Study Notes for A Level Geography Collections 24 Coasts & Landscapes Revision Study Notes for A Level Geography & IB Collections 16 Glaciers Revision Study Notes for A Level & IB Geography Collections 13 GCSE Geography Exam Technique Collections Glacial Systems & Landscapes Core Resource Pack for AQA A Level Geography SKU: 05-4128-10113-01 Instant Download School network license \u00a325.00\u00a0(+VAT) Glacial Systems & Landscapes Core Resource Pack for AQA A Level Geography Added to your Shopping Cart! Glacial Systems & Landscapes Core Resource Pack for AQA A Level Geography SKU: 05-4128-10113-01 Instant Download \u00a325.00\u00a0(+VAT) Continue shopping Go to checkout \u203a AQA A Level Geography Course Companion (Entire Linear Course) SKU: 05-4125-10109-01 Instant Download School network license \u00a3100.00\u00a0(+VAT) AQA A Level Geography Course Companion (Entire Linear Course) Added to your Shopping Cart! AQA A Level Geography Course Companion (Entire Linear Course) SKU: 05-4125-10109-01 Instant Download \u00a3100.00\u00a0(+VAT) Continue shopping Go to checkout \u203a Teaching Vacancies Student Revision Workshops Contributor tutor2u, Home based Exam markers for GCSE and A-level Geography \u2013 Apply now AQA, Home Browse all jobs \u203a Recruitment Advertise your vacancies with\u00a0tutor2u Much cheaper & more effective than TES or the Guardian. Reach the audience you really want to apply for your teaching vacancy by posting directly to our website and related social media audiences. Find our more \u203a Advertise your teaching jobs with tutor2u Subjects \u203a Business \u203a Economics \u203a English \u203a Geography \u203a History \u203a Law \u203a Maths \u203a PE \u203a Politics \u203a Psychology \u203a Religious Studies \u203a Sociology Company \u203a About us \u203a News \u203a Support Contact Boston House, 214 High Street, Boston Spa, West Yorkshire, LS23 6AD Tel: +44 0844 800 0085 Fax: +44 01937 842110 Follow us Twitter Facebook LinkedIn YouTube Partners Nexcess VUE Cinemas We\u2019re proud to sponsor TABS Cricket Club, Harrogate Town AFC and the Wetherby Junior Cricket League as part of our commitment to invest in the local community Company Reg no: 04489574 | VAT reg no 816865400 \u00a9 Copyright 2018 | Privacy & cookies | Terms of use Back to top A New Home for tutor2u Resources \u00d7 We've just flicked the switch on moving all our digital resources to instant digital download - via our new subject stores. For every subject you can now access each digital resource as soon as it is ordered. This will always be the latest edition of each resource too (and we'll update you automatically if there is an upgraded version to use). Simply add the required resources to your cart, checkout using the usual options and your resources will be available to access immediately via your mytutor2u account. Our Subject Stores Business Economics English Coming soon! Geography History Law Maths Politics Psychology Sociology Religious Studies Coming soon! Specialist Channels The Professional Teacher", "Cryosphere - Wikipedia Cryosphere From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Those portions of Earth's surface where water is in solid form For the scientific journal, see The Cryosphere. Overview of the Cryosphere and its larger components, from the UN Environment Programme Global Outlook for Ice and Snow. The cryosphere (from the Greek \u03ba\u03c1\u03cd\u03bf\u03c2 kryos, \"cold\", \"frost\" or \"ice\" and \u03c3\u03c6\u03b1\u1fd6\u03c1\u03b1 sphaira, \"globe, ball\"[1]) is those portions of Earth's surface where water is in solid form, including sea ice, lake ice, river ice, snow cover, glaciers, ice caps, ice sheets, and frozen ground (which includes permafrost). Thus, there is a wide overlap with the hydrosphere. The cryosphere is an integral part of the global climate system with important linkages and feedbacks generated through its influence on surface energy and moisture fluxes, clouds, precipitation, hydrology, atmospheric and oceanic circulation. Through these feedback processes, the cryosphere plays a significant role in the global climate and in climate model response to global changes. The term deglaciation describes the retreat of cryospheric features. Cryology is the study of cryospheres. Contents 1 Structure 1.1 Snow 1.2 Sea ice 1.3 Lake ice and river ice 1.4 Frozen ground and permafrost 1.5 Glaciers and ice sheets 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Structure[edit] Extent of the regions affected by components of the cryosphere around the world from the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report Frozen water is found on the Earth\u2019s surface primarily as snow cover, freshwater ice in lakes and rivers, sea ice, glaciers, ice sheets, and frozen ground and permafrost (permanently frozen ground). The residence time of water in each of these cryospheric sub-systems varies widely. Snow cover and freshwater ice are essentially seasonal, and most sea ice, except for ice in the central Arctic, lasts only a few years if it is not seasonal. A given water particle in glaciers, ice sheets, or ground ice, however, may remain frozen for 10-100,000 years or longer, and deep ice in parts of East Antarctica may have an age approaching 1 million years. Most of the world\u2019s ice volume is in Antarctica, principally in the East Antarctic Ice Sheet. In terms of areal extent, however, Northern Hemisphere winter snow and ice extent comprise the largest area, amounting to an average 23% of hemispheric surface area in January. The large areal extent and the important climatic roles of snow and ice, related to their unique physical properties, indicate that the ability to observe and model snow and ice-cover extent, thickness, and physical properties (radiative and thermal properties) is of particular significance for climate research. There are several fundamental physical properties of snow and ice that modulate energy exchanges between the surface and the atmosphere. The most important properties are the surface reflectance (albedo), the ability to transfer heat (thermal diffusivity), and the ability to change state (latent heat). These physical properties, together with surface roughness, emissivity, and dielectric characteristics, have important implications for observing snow and ice from space. For example, surface roughness is often the dominant factor determining the strength of radar backscatter .[2] Physical properties such as crystal structure, density, length, and liquid water content are important factors affecting the transfers of heat and water and the scattering of microwave energy. The surface reflectance of incoming solar radiation is important for the surface energy balance (SEB). It is the ratio of reflected to incident solar radiation, commonly referred to as albedo. Climatologists are primarily interested in albedo integrated over the shortwave portion of the electromagnetic spectrum (~300 to 3500\u00a0nm), which coincides with the main solar energy input. Typically, albedo values for non-melting snow-covered surfaces are high (~80-90%) except in the case of forests. The higher albedos for snow and ice cause rapid shifts in surface reflectivity in autumn and spring in high latitudes, but the overall climatic significance of this increase is spatially and temporally modulated by cloud cover. (Planetary albedo is determined principally by cloud cover, and by the small amount of total solar radiation received in high latitudes during winter months.) Summer and autumn are times of high-average cloudiness over the Arctic Ocean so the albedo feedback associated with the large seasonal changes in sea-ice extent is greatly reduced. Groisman et al.[3] observed that snow cover exhibited the greatest influence on the Earth radiative balance in the spring (April to May) period when incoming solar radiation was greatest over snow-covered areas.[3] The thermal properties of cryospheric elements also have important climatic consequences. Snow and ice have much lower thermal diffusivities than air. Thermal diffusivity is a measure of the speed at which temperature waves can penetrate a substance. Snow and ice are many orders of magnitude less efficient at diffusing heat than air. Snow cover insulates the ground surface, and sea ice insulates the underlying ocean, decoupling the surface-atmosphere interface with respect to both heat and moisture fluxes. The flux of moisture from a water surface is eliminated by even a thin skin of ice, whereas the flux of heat through thin ice continues to be substantial until it attains a thickness in excess of 30 to 40\u00a0cm. However, even a small amount of snow on top of the ice will dramatically reduce the heat flux and slow down the rate of ice growth. The insulating effect of snow also has major implications for the hydrological cycle. In non-permafrost regions, the insulating effect of snow is such that only near-surface ground freezes and deep-water drainage is uninterrupted.[4] While snow and ice act to insulate the surface from large energy losses in winter, they also act to retard warming in the spring and summer because of the large amount of energy required to melt ice (the latent heat of fusion, 3.34 x 105 J/kg at 0\u00a0\u00b0C). However, the strong static stability of the atmosphere over areas of extensive snow or ice tends to confine the immediate cooling effect to a relatively shallow layer, so that associated atmospheric anomalies are usually short-lived and local to regional in scale.[5] In some areas of the world such as Eurasia, however, the cooling associated with a heavy snowpack and moist spring soils is known to play a role in modulating the summer monsoon circulation.[6] Gutzler and Preston (1997) recently presented evidence for a similar snow-summer circulation feedback over the southwestern United States.[7] The role of snow cover in modulating the monsoon is just one example of a short-term cryosphere-climate feedback involving the land surface and the atmosphere. From Figure 1 it can be seen that there are numerous cryosphere-climate feedbacks in the global climate system. These operate over a wide range of spatial and temporal scales from local seasonal cooling of air temperatures to hemispheric-scale variations in ice sheets over time-scales of thousands of years. The feedback mechanisms involved are often complex and incompletely understood. For example, Curry et al. (1995) showed that the so-called \u201csimple\u201d sea ice-albedo feedback involved complex interactions with lead fraction, melt ponds, ice thickness, snow cover, and sea-ice extent. Snow[edit] Snow cover has the second-largest areal extent of any component of the cryosphere, with a mean maximum areal extent of approximately 47 million km2. Most of the Earth\u2019s snow-covered area (SCA) is located in the Northern Hemisphere, and temporal variability is dominated by the seasonal cycle; Northern Hemisphere snow-cover extent ranges from 46.5 million km2 in January to 3.8 million km2 in August.[8] North American winter SCA has exhibited an increasing trend over much of this century[9][10] largely in response to an increase in precipitation.[11] However, the available satellite data show that the hemispheric winter snow cover has exhibited little interannual variability over the 1972-1996 period, with a coefficient of variation (COV=s.d./mean) for January Northern Hemisphere snow cover of < 0.04. According to Groisman et al.[3] Northern Hemisphere spring snow cover should exhibit a decreasing trend to explain an observed increase in Northern Hemisphere spring air temperatures this century. Preliminary estimates of SCA from historical and reconstructed in situ snow-cover data suggest this is the case for Eurasia, but not for North America, where spring snow cover has remained close to current levels over most of this century.[12] Because of the close relationship observed between hemispheric air temperature and snow-cover extent over the period of satellite data (IPCC 1996), there is considerable interest in monitoring Northern Hemisphere snow-cover extent for detecting and monitoring climate change. Snow cover is an extremely important storage component in the water balance, especially seasonal snowpacks in mountainous areas of the world. Though limited in extent, seasonal snowpacks in the Earth\u2019s mountain ranges account for the major source of the runoff for stream flow and groundwater recharge over wide areas of the midlatitudes. For example, over 85% of the annual runoff from the Colorado River basin originates as snowmelt. Snowmelt runoff from the Earth\u2019s mountains fills the rivers and recharges the aquifers that over a billion people depend on for their water resources. Further, over 40% of the world\u2019s protected areas are in mountains, attesting to their value both as unique ecosystems needing protection and as recreation areas for humans. Climate warming is expected to result in major changes to the partitioning of snow and rainfall, and to the timing of snowmelt, which will have important implications for water use and management. These changes also involve potentially important decadal and longer time-scale feedbacks to the climate system through temporal and spatial changes in soil moisture and runoff to the oceans.(Walsh 1995). Freshwater fluxes from the snow cover into the marine environment may be important, as the total flux is probably of the same magnitude as desalinated ridging and rubble areas of sea ice.[13] In addition, there is an associated pulse of precipitated pollutants which accumulate over the Arctic winter in snowfall and are released into the ocean upon ablation of the sea-ice . Sea ice[edit] Sea ice covers much of the polar oceans and forms by freezing of sea water. Satellite data since the early 1970s reveal considerable seasonal, regional, and interannual variability in the sea-ice covers of both hemispheres. Seasonally, sea-ice extent in the Southern Hemisphere varies by a factor of 5, from a minimum of 3-4 million km2 in February to a maximum of 17-20 million km2 in September.[14][15] The seasonal variation is much less in the Northern Hemisphere where the confined nature and high latitudes of the Arctic Ocean result in a much larger perennial ice cover, and the surrounding land limits the equatorward extent of wintertime ice. Thus, the seasonal variability in Northern Hemisphere ice extent varies by only a factor of 2, from a minimum of 7-9 million km2 in September to a maximum of 14-16 million km2 in March.[15][16] The ice cover exhibits much greater regional-scale interannual variability than it does hemispherical. For instance, in the region of the Sea of Okhotsk and Japan, maximum ice extent decreased from 1.3 million km2 in 1983 to 0.85 million km2 in 1984, a decrease of 35%, before rebounding the following year to 1.2 million km2.[15] The regional fluctuations in both hemispheres are such that for any several-year period of the satellite record some regions exhibit decreasing ice coverage while others exhibit increasing ice cover.[17] The overall trend indicated in the passive microwave record from 1978 through mid-1995 shows that the extent of Arctic sea ice is decreasing 2.7% per decade.[18] Subsequent work with the satellite passive-microwave data indicates that from late October 1978 through the end of 1996 the extent of Arctic sea ice decreased by 2.9% per decade while the extent of Antarctic sea ice increased by 1.3% per decade.[19] The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change publication Climate change 2013: The Physical Science Basis stated that sea ice extent for the Northern Hemisphere showed a decrease of 3.8% \u00b1 0.3% per decade from November 1978 to December 2012.[20] Lake ice and river ice[edit] Ice forms on rivers and lakes in response to seasonal cooling. The sizes of the ice bodies involved are too small to exert other than localized climatic effects. However, the freeze-up/break-up processes respond to large-scale and local weather factors, such that considerable interannual variability exists in the dates of appearance and disappearance of the ice. Long series of lake-ice observations can serve as a proxy climate record, and the monitoring of freeze-up and break-up trends may provide a convenient integrated and seasonally specific index of climatic perturbations. Information on river-ice conditions is less useful as a climatic proxy because ice formation is strongly dependent on river-flow regime, which is affected by precipitation, snow melt, and watershed runoff as well as being subject to human interference that directly modifies channel flow, or that indirectly affects the runoff via land-use practices. Lake freeze-up depends on the heat storage in the lake and therefore on its depth, the rate and temperature of any inflow, and water-air energy fluxes. Information on lake depth is often unavailable, although some indication of the depth of shallow lakes in the Arctic can be obtained from airborne radar imagery during late winter (Sellman et al. 1975) and spaceborne optical imagery during summer (Duguay and Lafleur 1997). The timing of breakup is modified by snow depth on the ice as well as by ice thickness and freshwater inflow. Frozen ground and permafrost[edit] Frozen ground (permafrost and seasonally frozen ground) occupies approximately 54 million km2 of the exposed land areas of the Northern Hemisphere (Zhang et al., 2003) and therefore has the largest areal extent of any component of the cryosphere. Permafrost (perennially frozen ground) may occur where mean annual air temperatures (MAAT) are less than -1 or -2\u00a0\u00b0C and is generally continuous where MAAT are less than -7\u00a0\u00b0C. In addition, its extent and thickness are affected by ground moisture content, vegetation cover, winter snow depth, and aspect. The global extent of permafrost is still not completely known, but it underlies approximately 20% of Northern Hemisphere land areas. Thicknesses exceed 600 m along the Arctic coast of northeastern Siberia and Alaska, but, toward the margins, permafrost becomes thinner and horizontally discontinuous. The marginal zones will be more immediately subject to any melting caused by a warming trend. Most of the presently existing permafrost formed during previous colder conditions and is therefore relic. However, permafrost may form under present-day polar climates where glaciers retreat or land emergence exposes unfrozen ground. Washburn (1973) concluded that most continuous permafrost is in balance with the present climate at its upper surface, but changes at the base depend on the present climate and geothermal heat flow; in contrast, most discontinuous permafrost is probably unstable or \"in such delicate equilibrium that the slightest climatic or surface change will have drastic disequilibrium effects\".[21] Under warming conditions, the increasing depth of the summer active layer has significant impacts on the hydrologic and geomorphic regimes. Thawing and retreat of permafrost have been reported in the upper Mackenzie Valley and along the southern margin of its occurrence in Manitoba, but such observations are not readily quantified and generalized. Based on average latitudinal gradients of air temperature, an average northward displacement of the southern permafrost boundary by 50-to-150\u00a0km could be expected, under equilibrium conditions, for a 1\u00a0\u00b0C warming. Only a fraction of the permafrost zone consists of actual ground ice. The remainder (dry permafrost) is simply soil or rock at subfreezing temperatures. The ice volume is generally greatest in the uppermost permafrost layers and mainly comprises pore and segregated ice in Earth material. Measurements of bore-hole temperatures in permafrost can be used as indicators of net changes in temperature regime. Gold and Lachenbruch (1973) infer a 2-4\u00a0\u00b0C warming over 75 to 100 years at Cape Thompson, Alaska, where the upper 25% of the 400-m thick permafrost is unstable with respect to an equilibrium profile of temperature with depth (for the present mean annual surface temperature of -5\u00a0\u00b0C). Maritime influences may have biased this estimate, however. At Prudhoe Bay similar data imply a 1.8\u00a0\u00b0C warming over the last 100 years (Lachenbruch et al. 1982). Further complications may be introduced by changes in snow-cover depths and the natural or artificial disturbance of the surface vegetation. The potential rates of permafrost thawing have been established by Osterkamp (1984) to be two centuries or less for 25-meter-thick permafrost in the discontinuous zone of interior Alaska, assuming warming from -0.4 to 0\u00a0\u00b0C in 3\u20134 years, followed by a further 2.6\u00a0\u00b0C rise. Although the response of permafrost (depth) to temperature change is typically a very slow process (Osterkamp 1984; Koster 1993), there is ample evidence for the fact that the active layer thickness quickly responds to a temperature change (Kane et al. 1991). Whether, under a warming or cooling scenario, global climate change will have a significant effect on the duration of frost-free periods in both regions with seasonally and perennially frozen ground. Glaciers and ice sheets[edit] Ice sheets and glaciers are flowing ice masses that rest on solid land. They are controlled by snow accumulation, surface and basal melt, calving into surrounding oceans or lakes and internal dynamics. The latter results from gravity-driven creep flow (\"glacial flow\") within the ice body and sliding on the underlying land, which leads to thinning and horizontal spreading.[22] Any imbalance of this dynamic equilibrium between mass gain, loss and transport due to flow results in either growing or shrinking ice bodies. Ice sheets are the greatest potential source of global freshwater, holding approximately 77% of the global total. This corresponds to 80 m of world sea-level equivalent, with Antarctica accounting for 90% of this. Greenland accounts for most of the remaining 10%, with other ice bodies and glaciers accounting for less than 0.5%. Because of their size in relation to annual rates of snow accumulation and melt, the residence time of water in ice sheets can extend to 100,000 or 1 million years. Consequently, any climatic perturbations produce slow responses, occurring over glacial and interglacial periods. Valley glaciers respond rapidly to climatic fluctuations with typical response times of 10\u201350 years.[23] However, the response of individual glaciers may be asynchronous to the same climatic forcing because of differences in glacier length, elevation, slope, and speed of motion. Oerlemans (1994) provided evidence of coherent global glacier retreat which could be explained by a linear warming trend of 0.66\u00a0\u00b0C per 100 years.[23] While glacier variations are likely to have minimal effects upon global climate, their recession may have contributed one third to one half of the observed 20th Century rise in sea level (Meier 1984; IPCC 1996). Furthermore, it is extremely likely that such extensive glacier recession as is currently observed in the Western Cordillera of North America,[24] where runoff from glacierized basins is used for irrigation and hydropower, involves significant hydrological and ecosystem impacts. Effective water-resource planning and impact mitigation in such areas depends upon developing a sophisticated knowledge of the status of glacier ice and the mechanisms that cause it to change. Furthermore, a clear understanding of the mechanisms at work is crucial to interpreting the global-change signals that are contained in the time series of glacier mass balance records. Combined glacier mass balance estimates of the large ice sheets carry an uncertainty of about 20%. Studies based on estimated snowfall and mass output tend to indicate that the ice sheets are near balance or taking some water out of the oceans.[25] Marinebased studies [26] suggest sea-level rise from the Antarctic or rapid ice-shelf basal melting. Some authors (Paterson 1993; Alley 1997) have suggested that the difference between the observed rate of sea-level rise (roughly 2\u00a0mm/y) and the explained rate of sea-level rise from melting of mountain glaciers, thermal expansion of the ocean, etc. (roughly 1\u00a0mm/y or less) is similar to the modeled imbalance in the Antarctic (roughly 1\u00a0mm/y of sea-level rise; Huybrechts 1990), suggesting a contribution of sea-level rise from the Antarctic. Relationships between global climate and changes in ice extent are complex. The mass balance of land-based glaciers and ice sheets is determined by the accumulation of snow, mostly in winter, and warm-season ablation due primarily to net radiation and turbulent heat fluxes to melting ice and snow from warm-air advection,[27][28](Munro 1990). However, most of Antarctica never experiences surface melting.[29] Where ice masses terminate in the ocean, iceberg calving is the major contributor to mass loss. In this situation, the ice margin may extend out into deep water as a floating ice shelf, such as that in the Ross Sea. Despite the possibility that global warming could result in losses to the Greenland ice sheet being offset by gains to the Antarctic ice sheet,[30] there is major concern about the possibility of a West Antarctic Ice Sheet collapse. The West Antarctic Ice Sheet is grounded on bedrock below sea level, and its collapse has the potential of raising the world sea level 6\u20137 m over a few hundred years. Most of the discharge of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet is via the five major ice streams (faster flowing ice) entering the Ross Ice Shelf, the Rutford Ice Stream entering Ronne-Filchner shelf of the Weddell Sea, and the Thwaites Glacier and Pine Island Glacier entering the Amundsen Ice Shelf. Opinions differ as to the present mass balance of these systems (Bentley 1983, 1985), principally because of the limited data. The West Antarctic Ice Sheet is stable so long as the Ross Ice Shelf is constrained by drag along its lateral boundaries and pinned by local grounding. See also[edit] Active layer Climate system Cryobiology Glaciers Hydrosphere Ice Ice cap Ice sheet Permafrost Sea ice Snow References[edit] ^ \u03c3\u03c6\u03b1\u1fd6\u03c1\u03b1, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus ^ Hall, D. K., 1996: Remote sensing applications to hydrology: imaging radar. Hydrological Sciences, 41, 609-624. ^ a b c Groisman, P. Ya, T. R. Karl, and R. W. Knight, 1994a: Observed impact of snow cover on the heat balance and the rise of continental spring temperatures. Science, 363, 198-200. ^ Lynch-Stieglitz, M., 1994: The development and validation of a simple snow model for the GISS GCM. J. Climate, 7, 1842-1855. ^ Cohen, J., and D. Rind, 1991: The effect of snow cover on the climate. J. Climate, 4, 689-706. ^ Vernekar, A. D., J. Zhou, and J. Shukla, 1995: The effect of Eurasian snow cover on the Indian monsoon. J. Climate, 8, 248-266. ^ Gutzler, David S.; Preston, Jessica W. (1997-09-01). \"Evidence for a relationship between spring snow cover in North America and summer rainfall in New Mexico\". Geophysical Research Letters. 24 (17): 2207\u20132210. doi:10.1029/97gl02099. ISSN\u00a01944-8007. ^ Robinson, D. A., K. F. Dewey, and R. R. Heim, 1993: Global snow cover monitoring: an update. Bull. Amer. Meteorol. Soc., 74, 1689-1696. ^ Brown, Ross D.; Goodison, Barry E.; Brown, Ross D.; Goodison, Barry E. (1996-06-01). \"Interannual Variability in Reconstructed Canadian Snow Cover, 1915\u20131992\". doi:10.1175/1520-0442(1996)009%3C1299:ivircs%3E2.0.co;2. ^ Hughes, M. G.; Frei, A.; Robinson, D.A. (1996). \"Historical analysis of North American snow cover extent: merging satellite and station-derived snow cover observations\". Proceedings of the Annual Meeting - Eastern Snow Conference. Williamsburg, Virginia: Eastern Snow Conference. pp.\u00a021\u201331. ^ Groisman, P. Ya, and D. R. Easterling, 1994: Variability and trends of total precipitation and snowfall over the United States and Canada. J. Climate, 7, 184-205. ^ Brown, R. D., 1997: Historical variability in Northern Hemisphere spring snow covered area. Annals of Glaciology, 25, 340-346. ^ Prinsenberg, S. J. 1988: Ice-cover and ice-ridge contributions to the freshwater contents of Hudson Bay and Foxe Basin. Arctic, 41, 6-11. ^ Zwally, H. J., J. C. Comiso, C. L. Parkinson, W. J. Campbell, F. D. Carsey, and P. Gloersen, 1983: Antarctic Sea Ice, 1973-1976: Satellite Passive-Microwave Observations. NASA SP-459, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Washington, D.C., 206 pp. ^ a b c Gloersen, P., W. J. Campbell, D. J. Cavalieri, J. C. Comiso, C. L. Parkinson, and H. J. Zwally, 1992: Arctic and Antarctic Sea Ice, 1978-1987: Satellite Passive-Microwave Observations and Analysis. NASA SP-511, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Washington, D.C., 290 pp. ^ Parkinson, C. L., J. C. Comiso, H. J. Zwally, D. J. Cavalieri, P. Gloersen, and W. J. Campbell, 1987: Arctic Sea Ice, 1973-1976: Satellite Passive-Microwave Observations, NASA SP-489, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Washington, D.C., 296 pp. ^ Parkinson, C. L., 1995: Recent sea-ice advances in Baffin Bay/Davis Strait and retreats in the Bellinshausen Sea. Annals of Glaciology, 21, 348-352. ^ Johannessen, O. M., M. Miles, and E. Bj\u00f8rgo, 1995: The Arctic\u2019s shrinking sea ice. Nature, 376, 126-127. ^ Cavalieri, D. J., P. Gloersen, C. L. Parkinson, J. C. Comiso, and H. J. Zwally, 1997: Observed hemispheric asymmetry in global sea ice changes. Science, 278, 1104-1106. ^ \"Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis\" (PDF). ipcc. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. p.\u00a0324. Retrieved 16 June 2015. ^ Washburn, A. L., 1973: Periglacial processes and environments. Edward Arnold, London, 320 pp. p.48 ^ Greve, R.; Blatter, H. (2009). Dynamics of Ice Sheets and Glaciers. Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-03415-2. ISBN\u00a0978-3-642-03414-5. ^ a b Oerlemans, J., 1994: Quantifying global warming from the retreat of glaciers. Science, 264, 243-245. ^ Pelto, M. S., 1996: Annual net balance of North Cascade Glaciers, 1984-94. J. Glaciology, 42, 3-9. ^ Bentley, C. R., and M. B. Giovinetto, 1991: Mass balance of Antarctica and sea level change. In: G. Weller, C. L. Wilson and B. A. B. Severin (eds.), Polar regions and climate change. University of Alaska, Fairbanks, p. 481-488. ^ Jacobs, S. S., H. H. Helmer, C. S. M. Doake, A. Jenkins, and R. M. Frohlich, 1992: Melting of ice shelves and the mass balance of Antarctica. J. Glaciology, 38, 375-387. ^ Paterson, W. S. B., 1993: World sea level and the present mass balance of the Antarctic ice sheet. In: W.R. Peltier (ed.), Ice in the Climate System, NATO ASI Series, I12, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 131-140. ^ Van den Broeke, M. R., 1996: The atmospheric boundary layer over ice sheets and glaciers. Utrecht, Universitiet Utrecht, 178 pp.. ^ Van den Broeke, M. R., and R. Bintanja, 1995: The interaction of katabatic wind and the formation of blue ice areas in East Antarctica. J. Glaciology, 41, 395-407 ^ Ohmura, A., M. Wild, and L. Bengtsson, 1996: A possible change in mass balance of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets in the coming century. J. Climate, 9, 2124-2135. Further reading[edit] Brown, R. D., and P. Cote, 1992: Inter annual variability in land fast ice thickness in the Canadian High Arctic, 1950-89. Arctic, 45, 273-284. Chahine, M. T., 1992: The hydrological cycle and its influence on climate. Nature, 359, 373-380. Flato, G. M., and R. D. Brown, 1996: Variability and climate sensitivity of landfast Arctic sea ice. J. Geophys. Res., 101(C10), 25,767-25,777. Groisman, P. Ya, T. R. Karl, and R. W. Knight, 1994b: Changes of snow cover, temperature and radiative heat balance over the Northern Hemisphere. J. Climate, 7, 1633-1656. Hughes, M. G., A. Frei, and D. A. Robinson, 1996: Historical analysis of North American snow cover extent: merging satellite and station-derived snow cover observations. Proc. 53rd Eastern Snow Conference, Williamsburg, Virginia, 21-31. Huybrechts, P., 1990: The Antarctic ice sheet during the last glacial inter glacial cycle: a three-dimensional experiment. Annals of Glaciology, 14, 115-119. IPCC, 1996: Climate Change 1995: The Science of Climate Change.Houghton, J. T., L. G. Meira Filho, B. A. Callander, N. Harris, A. Kattenberg, and K. Maskell (eds.), Contribution of WGI to the Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 572 pp. Ledley, T. S., 1991: Snow on sea ice: competing effects in shaping climate. J. Geophys. Res., 96, 17,195-17,208. Ledley, T. S., 1993: Variations in snow on sea ice: a mechanism for producing climate variations. J. Geophys. Res., 98(D6), 10,401-10,410. Lynch-Stieglitz, M., 1994: The development and validation of a simple snow model for the GISS GCM. J. Climate, 7, 1842-1855. Martin, S., K. Steffen, J. Comiso, D. Cavalieri, M. R. Drinkwater, and B. Holt, 1992: Microwave remote sensing of polynyas. In: Carsey, F. D. (ed.), Microwave remote sensing of sea ice, Washington, DC, American Geophysical Union, 1992, 303-311. Meier, M. F., 1984: Contribution of small glaciers to global sea level rise. Science, 226, 1418-1421. Parkinson, C. L., J. C. Comiso, H. J. Zwally, D. J. Cavalieri, P. Gloersen, and W. J. Campbell, 1987: Arctic Sea Ice, 1973-1976: Satellite Passive-Microwave Observations, NASA SP-489, National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Washington, D.C., 296 pp. Paterson, W. S. B., 1993: World sea level and the present mass balance of the Antarctic ice sheet. In: W.R. Peltier (ed.), Ice in the Climate System, NATO ASI Series, I12, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 131-140. Robinson, D. A., K. F. Dewey, and R. R. Heim, 1993: Global snow cover monitoring: an update. Bull. Amer. Meteorol. Soc., 74, 1689-1696. Steffen, K., and A. Ohmura, 1985: Heat exchange and surface conditions in North Water, northern Baffin Bay. Annals of Glaciology, 6, 178-181. Van den Broeke, M. R., 1996: The atmospheric boundary layer over ice sheets and glaciers. Utrecht, Universities Utrecht, 178 pp. Van den Broeke, M. R., and R. Bintanja, 1995: The interaction of katabatic wind and the formation of blue ice areas in East Antarctica. J. Glaciology, 41, 395-407. Welch, H. E., 1992: Energy flow through the marine ecosystem of the Lancaster Sound region, Arctic Canada. Arctic, 45, 343. Fedorov R. Cryogenic Resources: Ice, Snow, and Permafrost in Traditional Subsistence Systems in Russia. // Resources 2019, 8(1), 17, https://doi.org/10.3390/resources8010017 External links[edit] International Association of Cryospheric Sciences (IACS) International Glaciological Society (IGS) Global Outlook for Ice and Snow Assessment on the state and future of the Cryosphere, by the UN Environment Programme, June 2007 Cryosphere overview map, from the UN Environment Programme Department of Atmospheric Sciences at the University of Illinois: Cryosphere Today Canadian Cryospheric Information Network State of the Canadian Cryosphere Near-real-time overview of global ice concentration and snow extent National Snow and Ice Data Center ResearchChannel \u2013 Cryospheric Response to Climate Change. A video produced by the University of Washington, March 2008 Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cryosphere&oldid=883467822\" Categories: Arctic geography terminologyEarth sciencesEnvironment of AntarcticaForms of waterHydrologyStructure of the EarthLithosphereClimateHidden categories: Articles with short descriptionArticles containing Ancient Greek-language text Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces ArticleTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version Languages \u0627\u0644\u0639\u0631\u0628\u064a\u0629AsturianuAz\u0259rbaycanca\u0411\u0435\u043b\u0430\u0440\u0443\u0441\u043a\u0430\u044fCatal\u00e0\u010ce\u0161tinaDanskDeutschEestiEspa\u00f1olEsperanto\u0641\u0627\u0631\u0633\u06ccFran\u00e7ais\u0939\u093f\u0928\u094d\u0926\u0940Bahasa IndonesiaItaliano\u05e2\u05d1\u05e8\u05d9\u05ea\u10e5\u10d0\u10e0\u10d7\u10e3\u10da\u10d8\u049a\u0430\u0437\u0430\u049b\u0448\u0430\u041a\u044b\u0440\u0433\u044b\u0437\u0447\u0430L\u00ebtzebuergeschLietuvi\u0173MagyarNederlands\u65e5\u672c\u8a9eNorskNorsk nynorskO\u02bbzbekcha/\u045e\u0437\u0431\u0435\u043a\u0447\u0430PolskiPortugu\u00easRom\u00e2n\u0103\u0420\u0443\u0441\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439\u0dc3\u0dd2\u0d82\u0dc4\u0dbdSimple EnglishSloven\u010dinaSloven\u0161\u010dinaSuomiSvenska\u0e44\u0e17\u0e22T\u00fcrk\u00e7e\u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0441\u044c\u043a\u0430Ti\u1ebfng Vi\u1ec7t\u4e2d\u6587 Edit links This page was last edited on 15 February 2019, at 16:04\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "The Changing Water Cycle - Metlink Teaching Weather and Climate + Weather for teachers in England, Scotland, Wales and N. Ireland Search Menu\u00a0 HomeTeachers Teachers\u2019 Resources Top 10 ideas for teaching the weatherExperimentsUseful LinksMetMark \u2013 recognising excellent weather teachingBook Reviews Primary Resources Key Stage 1 KS1 Resources Key Stage 2 KS2 ResourcesScience of Weather Scottish Primary Curriculum Scottish Primary Curriculum Experiments/Demonstrations Secondary Resources Key Stage 3 KS3 Resources Key Stage 4 KS4 ResourcesAQA 2016 Geography GCSEEdExcel 2016 Geography A GCSEEdExcel 2016 Geography B GCSEOCR 2016 Geography A GCSEOCR 2016 Geography B GCSEWJEC 2016 Geography A GCSEWJEC 2016 Geography B GCSE A Level A-Level Resources2016 AQA A level Geography2016 EdExcel A Level Geography2016 OCR A Level Geography2016 WJEC/ Eduqas A level Geography Scottish Secondary Curriculum Secondary Scottish Resources Scout BadgeExperiments/demonstrations Careers and Courses Meteorology CoursesCareersWork Experience Fieldwork Observations, Instruments and Data Observations and DataTop 10 Ideas for Weather FieldworkBorrow an InstrumentCloudWheel CutoutBeaufort ScaleCloudKeyWeather StationsProjectsHelp and Hints for ObservingWeather Clubs Competitions Balloon LaunchWow Weather Miscellaneous Weather Urban Heat IslandsWeather FolkloreWeather FactsWeather GlossaryWill it Snow?Case StudiesIn Depth \u2013 Extreme Weather (Met Office)In Depth \u2013 The Coriolis EffectIn Depth \u2013 Understanding Weather (Met Office)In Depth \u2013 the Water Cycle (Met Office) Weather Hazards Local WindsSevere StormsMountain WeatherFloodsDroughtSailing WeatherThunder and LightningSunlight Science in the Sky Cumulus CloudsHooked CirrusCumulus Clouds and FogRainbowsFogContrails Climate Climate Change Teaching Resources Climate Change Teaching ResourcesPast Climate Teaching ResourcesClimate Change Negotiations For SchoolsTree Ring ResourcesIn Depth \u2013 ClimateIn Depth \u2013 CarbonMicroclimates IPCC IPCC 2013 FAQsIPCC 2013 FiguresIPCC updates for geography teachersIPCC updates for A level geographyIPCC updates for science teachers Climate Change Schools\u2019 Project Climate Change Schools\u2019 Project Resources Climate4classrooms Resources Climate for Classrooms Resources The Changing Water Cycle Questions to Consider: Explain two reasons why a warming climate results in a more intense water cycle. How do changes in the water cycle impact i) the surface water of oceans in the subtropics ii) the surface water of oceans in tropical and polar regions. Describe the potential global change in annual mean precipitation for the period 2081 -2100. Identify three key differences between the carbon cycle and the water cycle. PDF download Estimates of the current global water budget and its annual flow using observations from 2002-2008 (1000 km3 for storage and 1000 km3 yr\u22121 for exchanges). Based on K.E. Trenberth, J. Fasullo, and J Mackaro, 2011: Atmospheric Moisture Transports from Ocean to Land and Global Energy Flows in Reanalyses. J. Climate, 24, 4907\u20134924. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/2011JCLI4171.1 Summary: About 10% of the water evaporated from the ocean is transported over land by the winds and finds its way back to the ocean following condensation into clouds, eventual precipitation as rain or snow and subsequent surface runoff and sub-surface flows As the climate warms, the water cycle intensifies. This is driven by an increase in evapotranspiration at the ground but is controlled by the temperature of the troposphere, which determines how much condensation, and hence precipitation, occurs. Over the last century, northern mid-latitude precipitation has increased and the number of heavy precipitation events over land has increased in more regions than it has decreased, particularly in Europe and North America. Globally, water vapour concentration in the lower atmosphere has increased by 3-4% since the 1970s. Water vapour is a strong and fast feedback that amplifies changes in surface temperature in response to other changes (for example increasing CO2) by about a factor of 2. Many human and natural systems are highly sensitive to changes in precipitation, river flow, soil and groundwater. Case Studies Changes to Groundwater in Uganda The mass budgets of Himalayan Glaciers Return to main menu Further Information Carbon, water, weather and climate a PowerPoint presentation focussing on recent changes to the carbon and water cycles, and how the two cycles interact. Background information on the water cycle. Is There Evidence for Changes in the Earth\u2019s Water Cycle? How Important Is Water Vapour to Climate Change? How Will the Earth\u2019s Water Cycle Change? How will climate change affect the frequency and severity of floods and droughts? How will the availability of water resources be affected by climate change? How is climate change affecting monsoons? In general, precipitation is limited by the availability of water, energy, or both. The world\u2019s oceans contain an effectively unlimited supply of water but locally, especially over land, a shortage of water can limit precipitation. As the climate warms, and there is more energy available to drive evaporation, the amount and intensity of precipitation is expected to increase. Evapotranspiration also increases over most land areas in a warmer climate, thereby accelerating the water cycle. However, changes in vegetation and soil moisture availability can also affect evapotranspiration rates. The differences between the carbon and water cycles: \u2013 Human emissions of water have no effect on the concentration of water in the atmosphere; the concentration of water in the atmosphere is largely controlled by temperature. However, human emissions of carbon have increased the concentration of carbon in the atmosphere by over 40%. \u2013 The effective lifetime of water in the atmosphere is of order 10 days, whereas that of CO2 ranges between a few years to thousands of years. \u2013 The concentration of water in the atmosphere is extremely variable spatially, ranging from close to zero at high altitudes to about 20g per kg of dry air near the tropical ocean surface, whereas, because of its long effective lifetime, that of carbon dioxide has a range of around only 2% both seasonally and geographically. \u2013 The cryosphere (ice on land and sea) is an important part of the water cycle, but not of the carbon cycle. Humans have indirectly, through temperature change, caused impacts on the cryosphere. WG1 Chapter 2, Figure 28. Annual precipitation anomalies averaged over land areas for four latitudinal bands and the globe relative to 1981-2000. Globally, there has been no significant long term trend in precipitation. In the Tropics, (30\u00b0S-30\u00b0N) precipitation has increased over the last decade, reversing the drying trend from the mid 70s to the mid 90s. The Northern Hemisphere mid-latitudes show a significant increase in precipitation over the last century. WG1 Summary for Policy Makers, Figure 8. Maps of modelled annual mean precipitation changes between 1986-2005 and 2081-2100 for a low (RCP2.6) and high (RCP8.5) emissions scenarios. Hatching indicates regions where there is low confidence in the projected change. Stippling indicates regions where there is more confidence in the projected precipitation change. WG1 Chapter 2, Figure 31. Global and annual averages of total atmospheric water vapour over ocean surfaces, shown relative to the average for the period 1988-2007. Evidence of climate change is also seen in other variables. Since the last IPCC report, satellite evidence has shown an increase in the amount of water vapour in the troposphere, the lowest part of the atmosphere.\u00a0 The year-to-year variability and long term trend in atmospheric water vapour content are closely linked to changes in global sea surface temperature, partly because warmer temperatures cause increased evaporation and partly because warmer air can carry more water vapour. Tropospheric water vapour is an important climate change feedback mechanism (through its powerful greenhouse effect) and is essential to the formation of clouds and precipitation. No significant change to the amount or type of clouds globally has been detected yet, although locally changes have been observed and linked to changing wind patterns. Changes in the water cycle also have an impact on the world\u2019s oceans, with surface waters in the evaporation dominated sub-tropics becoming more saline and surface waters in the rainfall-dominated tropical and polar regions becoming fresher. WG2 Chapter 3, Figure 4. Percentage change of mean annual streamflow for a global mean temperature rise of 2\u00b0C above 1980\u20132010 (2.7\u00b0C above pre-industrial). Colour hues show the amount of change and saturation shows the agreement on the sign of change (i.e. the darker the colour, the more confidence in the result). Extreme Precipitation and Flooding Since 1951 there have been statistically significant increases in the number of heavy precipitation events in more regions than there have been decreases, but there are many regional and seasonal variations in the trend. The most consistent trend is seen in North America, where there has been an increase in the frequency and intensity of extreme precipitation. In the future, the number of tropical cyclones globally may fall but their maximum wind speed and precipitation is expected to increase, in a warmer and more energetic atmosphere. Freshwater-related risks (e.g. river flooding) of climate change increase significantly with increasing greenhouse gas concentrations. Drought Increased evapotranspiration over land can lead to more intense and frequent periods of agricultural drought. There has been an increase in the frequency and intensity of drought in the Mediterranean and West Africa, but a decrease in central North America and north-west Australia. ENSO We cannot yet predict how the El Ni\u00f1o Southern Oscillation (ENSO), which has a significant impact on precipitation patterns around the world in both its El Ni\u00f1o and La Ni\u00f1o phases, may change in the 21st century. The Cryosphere Frozen stores of water form an important component of the water cycle and are depended upon by societies and ecosystems. The Arctic and Antarctic sea-ice covers are projected to shrink in the 21st century. The Arctic may become almost entirely ice-free in late summer. Polar amplification occurs if the magnitude of the surface temperature change at high latitudes exceeds the globally averaged temperature change on time scales greater than the annual cycle. One of the ways this can happen is in response to rising CO2 levels in the atmosphere. As the air temperature warms, sea ice retreats and snow cover reduced, the surface albedo decreases, air temperatures increase and the ocean can absorb more heat \u2013 a positive feedback mechanism which result in a local amplification of the warming. This polar amplification can have consequences for the melting of ice sheets, global sea level and on the carbon cycle through the melting of the permafrost. Ice sheets also play an essential role in the Earth\u2019s climate. They interact with the atmosphere, the ocean\u2013sea ice system, the lithosphere and the surrounding vegetation, respond to greenhouse gas changes and affect global climate on a variety of time scales. Ice sheets grow when annual snow accumulation exceeds melting. Growing ice sheets expand on previously darker vegetated areas, thus leading to an increase of surface albedo, further cooling and a local drying of the air as the ice sheets grow upwards into colder air. Massive freshwater release from retreating ice sheets, can feed back to the climate system by altering sea level, oceanic deep convection, ocean circulation, heat transport, sea ice and the global atmospheric circulation. Whereas the initial response of ice sheets to external forcings (such as greenhouse gas changes) can be quite fast, involving for instance ice shelf processes and outlet glaciers (10 to 1000 years), their long-term adjustment can take much longer. Is There Evidence for Changes in the Earth\u2019s Water Cycle? WG1 FAQ3.2 The Earth\u2019s water cycle involves evaporation and precipitation of moisture at the Earth\u2019s surface. Changes in the atmosphere\u2019s water vapour content provide strong evidence that the water cycle is already responding to a warming climate. Further evidence comes from changes in the distribution of ocean salinity, which, due to a lack of long-term observations of rain and evaporation over the global oceans, has become an important proxy rain gauge. The water cycle is expected to intensify in a warmer climate, because warmer air can be moister: the atmosphere can hold about 7% more water vapour for each degree Celsius of warming. Observations since the 1970s show increases in surface and lower atmospheric water vapour (Figure 1a), at a rate consistent with observed warming. Moreover, evaporation and precipitation are projected to intensify in a warmer climate. Recorded changes in ocean salinity in the last 50 years support that projection. Seawater contains both salt and fresh water, and its salinity is a function of the weight of dissolved salts it contains. Because the total amount of salt\u2014which comes from the weathering of rocks\u2014does not change over human time scales, seawater\u2019s salinity can only be altered\u2014over days or centuries\u2014by the addition or removal of fresh water. The atmosphere connects the ocean\u2019s regions of net fresh water loss to those of fresh water gain by moving evaporated water vapour from one place to another. The distribution of salinity at the ocean surface largely reflects the spatial pattern of evaporation minus precipitation, runoff from land, and sea ice processes. There is some shifting of the patterns relative to each other, because of the ocean\u2019s currents. Subtropical waters are highly saline, because evaporation exceeds rainfall, whereas seawater at high latitudes and in the tropics\u2014where more rain falls than evaporates\u2014is less so (Figure 1b, d). The Atlantic, the saltiest ocean basin, loses more freshwater through evaporation than it gains from precipitation, while the Pacific is nearly neutral (i.e., precipitation gain nearly balances evaporation loss), and the Southern Ocean (region around Antarctica) is dominated by precipitation. Changes in surface salinity and in the upper ocean have reinforced the mean salinity pattern. The evaporation-dominated subtropical regions have become saltier, while the precipitation-dominated subpolar and tropical regions have become fresher. When changes over the top 500m are considered, the evaporation-dominated Atlantic has become saltier, while the nearly neutral Pacific and precipitation-dominated Southern Ocean have become fresher (Figure 1c). Observing changes in precipitation and evaporation directly and globally is difficult, because most of the exchange of fresh water between the atmosphere and the surface happens over the 70% of the Earth\u2019s surface covered by ocean. Long-term precipitation records are available only from over the land, and there are no long-term measurements of evaporation. Land-based observations show precipitation increases in some regions, and decreases in others, making it difficult to construct a globally integrated picture. Land-based observations have shown more extreme rainfall events, and more flooding associated with earlier snow melt at high northern latitudes, but there is strong regionality in the trends. Land-based observations are so far insufficient to provide evidence of changes in drought. Ocean salinity, on the other hand, acts as a sensitive and effective rain gauge over the ocean. It naturally reflects and smooths out the difference between water gained by the ocean from precipitation, and water lost by the ocean through evaporation, both of which are very patchy and episodic. Ocean salinity is also affected by water runoff from the continents, and by the melting and freezing of sea ice or floating glacial ice. Fresh water added by melting ice on land will change global-averaged salinity, but changes to date are too small to observe. Data from the past 50 years show widespread salinity changes in the upper ocean, which are indicative of systematic changes in precipitation and runoff minus evaporation, as illustrated below. Figure 1: Changes in sea surface salinity are related to the atmospheric patterns of evaporation minus precipitation (E \u2013 P) and trends in total precipitable water: (a) Linear trend (1988\u20132010) in total precipitable water (water vapour integrated from the Earth\u2019s surface up through the entire atmosphere) (kg m\u20132 per decade) from satellite observations (Special Sensor Microwave Imager) (blues: wetter; yellows: drier). (b) The 1979\u20132005 climatological mean net E \u2013P (cm yr\u20131) from meteorological reanalysis (reds: net evaporation; blues: net precipitation). (c) Trend (1950\u20132000) in surface salinity (PSS78 per 50 years) (blues freshening; yellows-reds saltier). (d) The climatological-mean surface salinity (PSS78) (blues: <35; yellows\u2013reds: >35). How Important Is Water Vapour to Climate Change? WG1 FAQ 8.1 As the largest contributor to the natural greenhouse effect, water vapour plays an essential role in the Earth\u2019s climate. However, the amount of water vapour in the atmosphere is controlled mostly by air temperature, rather than by emissions. For that reason, scientists consider it a feedback agent, rather than a forcing to climate change. Anthropogenic emissions of water vapour through irrigation or power plant cooling have a negligible impact on the global climate. Water vapour is the primary greenhouse gas in the Earth\u2019s atmosphere. The contribution of water vapour to the natural greenhouse effect relative to that of carbon dioxide (CO2) depends on the accounting method, but can be considered to be approximately two to three times greater. Additional water vapour is injected into the atmosphere from anthropogenic activities, mostly through increased evaporation from irrigated crops, but also through power plant cooling, and marginally through the combustion of fossil fuel. One may therefore question why there is so much focus on CO2, and not on water vapour, as a forcing to climate change. Water vapour behaves differently from CO2 in one fundamental way: it can condense and precipitate. When air with high humidity cools, some of the vapour condenses into water droplets or ice particles and precipitates. The typical residence time of water vapour in the atmosphere is ten days. The flux of water vapour into the atmosphere from anthropogenic sources is considerably less than from \u2018natural\u2019 evaporation. Therefore, it has a negligible impact on overall concentrations, and does not contribute significantly to the long-term greenhouse effect. This is the main reason why tropospheric water vapour (typically below 10km altitude) is not considered to be an anthropogenic gas contributing to radiative forcing. Anthropogenic emissions do have a significant impact on water vapour in the stratosphere, which is the part of the atmosphere above about 10 km. Increased concentrations of methane (CH4) due to human activities lead to an additional source of water, through oxidation, which partly explains the observed changes in that atmospheric layer. That stratospheric water change has a radiative impact, is considered a forcing, and can be evaluated. Stratospheric concentrations of water have varied significantly in past decades. The full extent of these variations is not well understood and is probably less a forcing than a feedback process added to natural variability. The contribution of stratospheric water vapour to warming, both forcing and feedback, is much smaller than from CH4 or CO2. The maximum amount of water vapour in the air is controlled by temperature. A typical column of air extending from the surface to the stratosphere (about 10km in height) in polar regions may contain only a few kilograms of water vapour per square metre, while a similar column of air in the tropics may contain up to 70 kg. With every extra degree of air temperature, the atmosphere can retain around 7% more water vapour (see upper-left insert in the figure). This increase in concentration amplifies the green\u00adhouse effect, and therefore leads to more warming. This process, referred to as the water vapour feedback, is well understood and quantified. It occurs in all models used to estimate climate change, where its strength is consistent with observations. Although an increase in atmospheric water vapour has been observed, this change is recognized as a climate feedback (from increased atmospheric temperature) and should not be interpreted as a radiative forcing from anthropogenic emissions. Currently, water vapour has the largest greenhouse effect in the Earth\u2019s atmosphere. However, other greenhouse gases, primarily CO2, are necessary to sustain the presence of water vapour in the atmosphere. Indeed, if these other gases were removed from the atmosphere, its temperature would drop sufficiently to induce a decrease of water vapour, leading to a runaway drop of the greenhouse effect that would plunge the Earth into a frozen state. So greenhouse gases other than water vapour provide the temperature structure that sustains current levels of atmospheric water vapour. Therefore, although CO2 is the main anthropogenic control knob on climate, water vapour is a strong and fast feedback that amplifies any initial forcing by a typical factor between two and three. Water vapour is not a significant initial forcing, but is nevertheless a fundamental agent of climate change. Illustration of the water cycle and its interaction with the greenhouse effect. The upper-left insert indicates the relative increase of potential water vapour content in the air with an increase of temperature (roughly 7% per degree). The white curls illustrate evaporation, which is compensated by precipitation to close the water budget. The red arrows illustrate the outgoing infrared radiation that is partly absorbed by water vapour and other gases, a process that is one component of the greenhouse effect. The stratospheric processes are not included in this figure. How Will the Earth\u2019s Water Cycle Change? WG1 FAQ 12.2 The flow and storage of water in the Earth\u2019s climate system are highly variable, but changes beyond those due to natural variability are expected by the end of the current century. In a warmer world, there will be net increases in rainfall, surface evaporation and plant transpiration. However, there will be substantial differences in the changes between locations. Some places will experience more precipitation and an accumulation of water on land. In others, the amount of water will decrease, due to regional drying and loss of snow and ice cover. The water cycle consists of water stored on the Earth in all its phases, along with the movement of water through the Earth\u2019s climate system. In the atmosphere, water occurs primarily as a gas\u2014water vapour\u2014but it also occurs as ice and liquid water in clouds. The ocean, of course, is primarily liquid water, but the ocean is also partly covered by ice in polar regions. Terrestrial water in liquid form appears as surface water\u2014such as lakes and rivers\u2014soil moisture and groundwater. Solid terrestrial water occurs in ice sheets, glaciers, snow and ice on the surface and in permafrost and seasonally frozen soil. Statements about future climate sometimes say that the water cycle will accelerate, but this can be misleading, for strictly speaking, it implies that the cycling of water will occur more and more quickly with time and at all locations. Parts of the world will indeed experience intensification of the water cycle, with larger transports of water and more rapid movement of water into and out of storage reservoirs. However, other parts of the climate system will experience substantial depletion of water, and thus less movement of water. Some stores of water may even vanish. As the Earth warms, some general features of change will occur simply in response to a warmer climate. Those changes are governed by the amount of energy that global warming adds to the climate system. Ice in all forms will melt more rapidly, and be less pervasive. For example, for some simulations assessed in this report, summer Arctic sea ice disappears before the middle of this century. The atmosphere will have more water vapour, and observations and model results indicate that it already does. By the end of the 21st century, the average amount of water vapour in the atmosphere could increase by 5 to 25%, depending on the amount of human emissions of greenhouse gases and radiatively active particles, such as smoke. Water will evaporate more quickly from the surface. Sea level will rise due to expansion of warming ocean waters and melting land ice flowing into the ocean. These general changes are modified by the complexity of the climate system, so that they should not be expected to occur equally in all locations or at the same pace. For example, circulation of water in the atmosphere, on land and in the ocean can change as climate changes, concentrating water in some locations and depleting it in others. The changes also may vary throughout the year: some seasons tend to be wetter than others. Thus, model simulations assessed in this report show that winter precipitation in northern Asia may increase by more than 50%, whereas summer precipitation there is projected to hardly change. Humans also intervene directly in the water cycle, through water management and changes in land use. Changing population distributions and water practices would produce further changes in the water cycle. Water cycle processes can occur over minutes, hours, days and longer, and over distances from metres to kilometres and greater. Variability on these scales is typically greater than for temperature, so climate changes in precipitation are harder to discern. Despite this complexity, projections of future climate show changes that are common across many models and climate forcing scenarios. These results collectively suggest well understood mechanisms of change, even if magnitudes vary with model and forcing. We focus here on changes over land, where changes in the water cycle have their largest impact on human and natural systems. Projected climate changes from simulations assessed in this report (shown schematically in Figure 1) generally show an increase in precipitation in parts of the deep tropics and polar latitudes that could exceed 50% by the end of the 21st century under the most extreme emissions scenario. In contrast, large areas of the subtropics could have decreases of 30% or more. In the tropics, these changes appear to be governed by increases in atmospheric water vapour and changes in atmospheric circulation that further concentrate water vapour in the tropics and thus promote more tropical rainfall. In the subtropics, these circulation changes simultaneously promote less rainfall despite warming in these regions. Because the subtropics are home to most of the world\u2019s deserts, these changes imply increasing aridity in already dry areas, and possible expansion of deserts. Increases at higher latitudes are governed by warmer temperatures, which allow more water in the atmosphere and thus, more water that can precipitate. The warmer climate also allows storm systems in the extratropics to transport more water vapour into the higher latitudes, without requiring substantial changes in typical wind strength. As indicated above, high latitude changes are more pronounced during the colder seasons. Whether land becomes drier or wetter depends partly on precipitation changes, but also on changes in surface evaporation and transpiration from plants (together called evapotranspiration). Because a warmer atmosphere can have more water vapour, it can induce greater evapotranspiration, given sufficient terrestrial water. However, increased carbon dioxide in the atmosphere reduces a plant\u2019s tendency to transpire into the atmosphere, partly counteracting the effect of warming. In the tropics, increased evapotranspiration tends to counteract the effects of increased precipitation on soil moisture, whereas in the subtropics, already low amounts of soil moisture allow for little change in evapotranspiration. At higher latitudes, the increased precipitation generally outweighs increased evapotranspiration in projected climates, yielding increased annual mean runoff, but mixed changes in soil moisture. As implied by circulation changes in Figure 1, boundaries of high or low moisture regions may also shift. A further complicating factor is the character of rainfall. Model projections show rainfall becoming more intense, in part because more moisture will be present in the atmosphere. Thus, for simulations assessed in this report, over much of the land, 1-day precipitation events that currently occur on average every 20 years could occur every 10 years or even more frequently by the end of the 21st century. At the same time, projections also show that precipitation events overall will tend to occur less frequently. These changes produce two seemingly contradictory effects: more intense downpours, leading to more floods, yet longer dry periods between rain events, leading to more drought. At high latitudes and at high elevation, further changes occur due to the loss of frozen water. Some of these are resolved by the present generation of global climate models (GCMs), and some changes can only be inferred because they involve features such as glaciers, which typically are not resolved or included in the models. The warmer climate means that snow tends to start accumulating later in the fall, and melt earlier in the spring. Simulations assessed in this report show March to April snow cover in the Northern Hemisphere is projected to decrease by approximately 10 to 30% on average by the end of this century, depending on the greenhouse gas scenario. The earlier spring melt alters the timing of peak springtime flow in rivers receiving snowmelt. As a result, later flow rates will decrease, potentially affecting water resource management. These features appear in GCM simulations. Loss of permafrost will allow moisture to seep more deeply into the ground, but it will also allow the ground to warm, which could enhance evapotranspiration. However, most current GCMs do not include all the processes needed to simulate well permafrost changes. Studies analysing soils freezing or using GCM output to drive more detailed land models suggest substantial permafrost loss by the end of this centuryChanges to Groundwater in Uganda . In addition, even though current GCMs do not explicitly include glacier evolution, we can expect that glaciers will continue to recede, and the volume of water they provide to rivers in the summer may dwindle in some locations as they disappear. Loss of glaciers will also contribute to a reduction in springtime river flow. However, if annual mean precipitation increases\u2014either as snow or rain\u2014then these results do not necessarily mean that annual mean river flow will decrease. Figure 1: Schematic diagram of projected changes in major components of the water cycle. The blue arrows indicate major types of water movement changes through the Earth\u2019s climate system: poleward water transport by extratropical winds, evaporation from the surface and runoff from the land to the oceans. The shaded regions denote areas more likely to become drier or wetter. Yellow arrows indicate an important atmospheric circulation change by the Hadley Circulation, whose upward motion promotes tropical rainfall, while suppressing subtropical rainfall. Model projections indicate that the Hadley Circulation will shift its downward branch poleward in both the Northern and Southern Hemispheres, with associated drying. Wetter conditions are projected at high latitudes, because a warmer atmosphere will allow greater precipitation, with greater movement of water into these regions. How will climate change affect the frequency and severity of floods and droughts? WG2 FAQ 3.1 Climate change is projected to alter the frequency and magnitude of both floods and droughts. The impact is expected to vary from region to region. The few available studies suggest that flood hazards will increase over more than half of the globe, in particular in central and eastern Siberia, parts of south-east Asia including India, tropical Africa, and northern South America, but decreases are projected in parts of northern and eastern Europe, Anatolia, central and east Asia, central North America, and southern South America. The frequency of floods in small river basins is very likely to increase, but that may not be true of larger watersheds because intense rain is usually confined to more limited areas. Spring snowmelt floods are likely to become smaller, both because less winter precipitation will fall as snow and because more snow will melt during thaws over the course of the entire winter. Worldwide, the damage from floods will increase because more people and more assets will be in harm\u2019s way. By the end of the 21st century meteorological droughts (less rainfall) and agricultural droughts (drier soil) are projected to become longer, or more frequent, or both, in some regions and some seasons, because of reduced rainfall or increased evaporation or both. But it is still uncertain what these rainfall and soil moisture deficits might mean for prolonged reductions of streamflow and lake and groundwater levels. Droughts are projected to intensify in southern Europe and the Mediterranean region, central Europe, central and southern North America, Central America, northeast Brazil and southern Africa. In dry regions, more intense droughts will stress water-supply systems. In wetter regions, more intense seasonal droughts can be managed by current water-supply systems and by adaptation; for example, demand can be reduced by using water more efficiently, or supply can be increased by increasing the storage capacity in reservoirs. How will the availability of water resources be affected by climate change? WG2 FAQ 3.2 Climate models project decreases of renewable water resources in some regions and increases in others, albeit with large uncertainty in many places. Broadly, water resources are projected to decrease in many mid-latitude and dry subtropical regions, and to increase at high latitudes and in many humid mid-latitude regions. Even where increases are projected, there can be short-term shortages due to more variable streamflow (because of greater variability of precipitation), and seasonal reductions of water supply due to reduced snow and ice storage. Availability of clean water can also be reduced by negative impacts of climate change on water quality; for instance the quality of lakes used for water supply could be impaired by the presence of algae producing toxins. How is climate change affecting monsoons? WG1 FAQ 14.1 Monsoons are the most important mode of seasonal climate variation in the tropics, and are responsible for a large fraction of the annual rainfall in many regions. Their strength and timing is related to atmospheric moisture content, land\u2013sea temperature contrast, land cover and use, atmospheric aerosol loadings and other factors. Overall, monsoonal rainfall is projected to become more intense in future, and to affect larger areas, because atmospheric moisture content increases with temperature. However, the localized effects of climate change on regional monsoon strength and variability are complex and more uncertain. Monsoon rains fall over all tropical continents: Asia, Australia, the Americas and Africa. The monsoon circulation is driven by the difference in temperature between land and sea, which varies seasonally with the distribution of solar heating. The duration and amount of rainfall depends on the moisture content of the air, and on the configuration and strength of the atmospheric circulation. The regional distribution of land and ocean also plays a role, as does topography. For example, the Tibetan Plateau\u2014through variations in its snow cover and surface heating\u2014modulates the strength of the complex Asian monsoon systems. Where moist on-shore winds rise over mountains, as they do in southwest India, monsoon rainfall is intensified. On the lee side of such mountains, it lessens. Since the late 1970s, the East Asian summer monsoon has been weakening and not extending as far north as it used to in earlier times, as a result of changes in the atmospheric circulation. That in turn has led to increasing drought in northern China, but floods in the Yangtze River Valley farther south. In contrast, the Indo-Australian and Western Pacific monsoon systems show no coherent trends since the mid-20th century, but are strongly modulated by the El Ni\u00f1o-Southern Oscillation (ENSO). Similarly, changes observed in the South American monsoon system over the last few decades are strongly related to ENSO variability. Evidence of trends in the North American monsoon system is limited, but a tendency towards heavier rainfalls on the northern side of the main monsoon region has been observed. No systematic long-term trends have been observed in the behaviour of the Indian or the African monsoons. The land surface warms more rapidly than the ocean surface, so that surface temperature contrast is increasing in most regions. The tropical atmospheric overturning circulation, however, slows down on average as the climate warms due to energy balance constraints in the tropical atmosphere. These changes in the atmospheric circulation lead to regional changes in monsoon intensity, area and timing. There are a number of other effects as to how climate change can influence monsoons. Surface heating varies with the intensity of solar radiation absorption, which is itself affected by any land use changes that alter the reflectivity (albedo) of the land surface. Also, changing atmospheric aerosol loadings, such as air pollution, affect how much solar radiation reaches the ground, which can change the monsoon circulation by altering summer solar heating of the land surface. Absorption of solar radiation by aerosols, on the other hand, warms the atmosphere, changing the atmospheric heating distribution. The strongest effect of climate change on the monsoons is the increase in atmospheric moisture associated with warming of the atmosphere, resulting in an increase in total monsoon rainfall even if the strength of the monsoon circulation weakens or does not change. Climate model projections through the 21st century show an increase in total monsoon rainfall, largely due to increasing atmospheric moisture content. The total surface area affected by the monsoons is projected to increase, along with the general poleward expansion of the tropical regions. Climate models project from 5% to an approximately 15% increase of global monsoon rainfall depending on scenarios. Though total tropical monsoon rainfall increases, some areas will receive less monsoon rainfall, due to weakening tropical wind circulations. Monsoon onset dates are likely to be early or not to change much and the monsoon retreat dates are likely to delay, resulting in lengthening of the monsoon season. Future regional trends in monsoon intensity and timing remain uncertain in many parts of the world. Year-to-year variations in the monsoons in many tropical regions are affected by ENSO. How ENSO will change in future\u2014and how its effects on monsoon will change\u2014also remain uncertain. However, the projected overall increase in monsoon rainfall indicates a corresponding increase in the risk of extreme rain events in most regions. Schematic diagram illustrating the main ways that human activity influences monsoon rainfall. As the climate warms, increasing water vapour transport from the ocean into land increases because warmer air contains more water vapour. This also increases the potential for heavy rainfalls. Warming-related changes in large-scale circulation influence the strength and extent of the overall monsoon circulation. Land use change and atmospheric aerosol loading can also affect the amount of solar radiation that is absorbed in the atmosphere and land, potentially moderating the land\u2013sea temperature difference. Changes to Groundwater in Uganda WG2 Chapter 3, Figure 5. Simulated change in mean monthly runoff of the Mitano River in Uganda across seven climate models, for a 2\u00b0C increase in global mean temperature above the 1961-1990 average. One of the seven climate models is highlighted separately, showing changes for both a 2\u00b0C increase (dotted line) and a 4\u00b0C increase (solid line). Precipitation is the main driver of changes to river runoff and the seasonal changes in precipitation are usually reflected in seasonal streamflow variability. However, changes in groundwater recharge also affect streamflow. As global temperatures rise, evapotranspiration increases, reducing the amount of groundwater.\u00a0 Human and natural systems in the Upper Nile region have historically been very vulnerable to changes in river flow. People are particularly reliant on the river for fishing and hydro-electric power production, so, although it can be hard for models to accurately recreate local rainfall patterns, it is important to try to project how they might change in the future. The Mitano river is in the Upper Nile basin in Uganda, which has a humid, tropical climate.\u00a0 Usually, the effect of the \u2018short\u2019 (March-May) and \u2018long\u2019 (September- November) rains determine the river\u2019s discharge. However, mean global temperature increases of 4\u00b0C or more with respect to the 1961-1990 average are projected to decrease groundwater outflow to the river so much that the annual mean discharge will fall, even though annual mean precipitation will be higher. The spring discharge peak disappears and the river flow regime changes from having two seasonal peaks to only one \u2013 the effect of the \u2018short rains\u2019 could be lost. This is because, for the Mitano, groundwater flow is far more important than lateral (quickflow within the upper soil profile) or surface flow. Increasing evapotranspiration limits the amount of water penetrating the soil profile and replenishing the shallow groundwater store during the first, short, wet season. Changing groundwater levels also affect land surface energy fluxes, including through evaporation, and thus feedback on the climate system, particularly in semi-arid areas. Additional source: Kingston, D. G. and Taylor, R. G.: Sources of uncertainty in climate change impacts on river discharge and groundwater in a headwater catchment of the Upper Nile Basin, Uganda, Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 14, 1297-1308, doi:10.5194/hess-14-1297-2010, 2010. The mass budgets of Himalayan Glaciers The mass budgets of Himalayan glaciers in Bhutan, China, India, Nepal and Pakistan have been negative, on average, for the past 5 decades. Changes in temperature and precipitation affect the glaciers, as do changes in the amount of black carbon (soot) in the atmosphere, which, when deposited on the glaciers\u2019 surface, can decrease the albedo and lead to melting. Many communities are both reliant on glacial meltwater and vulnerable to flooding from moraine-dammed ice marginal lakes. A Level Climate Change Updates Main Menu 1. The changing carbon cycle 2. The changing water cycle 3. Carbon cycle feedbacks 4. Ecosystem Feedbacks from Carbon and Water Cycle Changes 5. Tipping points: Critical thresholds for climate change 6. Impact of climate change on water supply 7. Sea level change 8. Country by country emissions of greenhouse gases 9. Mitigation strategies 10. Adaptation strategies Glossary Units Join Our Mailing List Sign up for infrequent updates about events and resources for teachers Email address: First Name: Last Name: Thank you, your sign-up request was successful! Please check your e-mail inbox. Given email address is already subscribed, thank you! Please provide a valid email address. Oops. Something went wrong. Please try again later. Metlink Royal Meteorological Society 104 Oxford Road Reading RG1 7LL tel: 0118 956 8500 RMetS is a registered charity No. 208222 Contact News Will it snow? 19/12/2018 Rainforest deforestation, the carbon and water cycles 15/11/2018 Climate Negotiations wins Scottish Award 02/11/2018 IPCC 1.5 Degree Report 10/10/2018 Weather and Climate Teacher CPD \u2013 Running now 03/10/2018 Copyright Metlink 2017 Site Map Top", "| CIRES Skip to main content Toggle navigation About About CIRES Administrative Staff Council of Fellows Researchers Partners Diversity Institutional Programs Directory Research Areas of Research Divisions Centers Programs Annual Reports Research Groups Instrument Development Education Affiliated Departments and Teaching Students & Postdocs Education and Outreach Website News & Events News Events Videos Spheres Blogs Map Contact Us Search form Search Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences Prev Next March 2016 Sun Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri Sat 28 29 1 2 3 4 5 Indigenous Peoples and Climate Justice Indigenous Peoples and Climate Justice Indigenous Peoples and Climate Justice Featured Speakers: Sarah A Krakoff: Professor of Law, University of Colorado Law School \u201cTribal Self-Determination, Cultural Survival, and Climate Justice\u201d Heather Lazrus: Project Scientist, National Center for Atmospheric Research \u201cRising Voices of Indigenous People in Weather and Climate Science and Policy\u201d Kyle Whyte: Associate Professor of Philosophy, Michigan State University \"Indigenous Climate Justice, Collective Continuance and Settler Colonialism\" location Eaton Humanities 150 Event TypeCSTPR 2016-03-01 Cryospheric and Polar Processes Seminar: Julienne Stroeve Cryospheric and Polar Processes Seminar: Julienne Stroeve Variability in the Antarctic Marginal Ice Zone and Pack Ice in Observations and NCAR CESM by Julienne Stroeve -\u00a0NSIDC/CIRES,\u00a0University of Colorado Boulder Sea ice around Antarctica reached another record high extent in September 2014, recording a maximum extent of more than 20 million km2 for the first time since the modern satellite data record began in October 1978. This follows previous record maxima in 2012 and 2013, resulting in an overall increase in Antarctic September sea ice extent of 1.3% per decade since 1979. Several explanations have been put forward to explain the increasing trends, such as anomalous short-term wind patterns that both grow and spread out the ice, and freshening of the surface ocean layer from increased melting of floating ice from the continent. These positive trends in Antarctic sea ice are at odds with climate model forecasts that suggest the sea ice should be declining in response to increasing greenhouse gases and stratospheric ozone depletion. While the reasons for the increases in total extent remain poorly understood, it is likely that these changes are not just impacting the total ice extent, but also the distribution of pack ice, the marginal ice zone (MIZ) and polynyas, with important ramifications for phytoplankton productivity that in turn impact zooplankton, fish, sea birds and marine mammals. This study evaluates changes in the distribution of the pack ice, polynyas and the marginal ice zone around Antarctica from two sea ice algorithms, the NASA Team and the Bootstrap. These results are further compared with climate model simulations from the CESM large ensemble output. Seasonal analysis of the different ice types using NASA Team and Bootstrap shows that during ice advance, the ice advances as pack ice, with a seasonal peak in September (broader peak for Bootstrap), and as the pack ice begins to retreat, it first converts to a wide area of MIZ, that reaches its peak around November (NASA Team) or December (Bootstrap). CESM also shows a similar seasonal cycle, with a peak in the pack ice in August, and a December/January peak in the MIZ. Seasonal variability and trends are further compared between the algorithms and the CESM large ensemble output. Results are highly sensitive to the sea ice algorithms used for analysis and regions chosen for evaluation, illustrating the different sensitivities of the algorithms and CESM to the varying influences of dynamic and thermodynamic processes. location RL-2 (on East Campus) room 155 2016-03-02 CSTPR Seminar: Lucy McAllister CSTPR Seminar: Lucy McAllister Coming to the Rescue? Tech Firms and the Harms of the Electronics Commodity Chain by Lucy McAllister -\u00a0Environmental Studies Program and Center for Science and Technology Policy Research, University of Colorado Boulder Abstract: The leaders of the global electronics commodity chain, multinational electronics corporations, perpetuate widespread human and environmental harms, including the global sale of \u201cconflict minerals\u201d that are used to fund the violence of warlords (Spectrum 2011), the depletion of virgin minerals and precious metals, primarily, from Africa (Boone & Ganeshan 2012), and the persistence of unsafe and environmentally hazardous working conditions at electronics factories in Asia (Zhou 2013). The practices commonly used to recycle electronic waste (e-waste) in the informal sector of developing countries, where roughly 50-80% of the global hazardous e-waste stream is sent, also produce severe harms, including health risks especially for women and children (Frazzoli 2010; Leung 2008; Sep\u00falveda et al. 2010). Despite the important role that multinational electronics firms play in harming people and the environment, and despite the likely role they play in obscuring their participation in such harms, little coordinated or interdisciplinary research has been done on these issues. Moreover, there is no research on the role that lead electronics firms play in maintaining a positive image amongst the public. The aim of this dissertation is to directly address this gap by investigating whether the role lead firms play in producing severe human and environmental problems throughout the electronics commodity chain has gone noticed or unnoticed by external audiences, and if so, why? Indeed, despite the acute human and environmental issues rampant throughout the mining, manufacturing, and disposal of electronics, research to date shows that consumers base purchasing decisions almost solely on considerations of lifestyle, convenience, upgrades, trends, and price (Brulle and Young 2007). This project therefore seeks to elucidate the many disconnects between electronics commodity chain problems, and consumer awareness and knowledge of such harms. More specifically, I investigate whether the legitimization of electronics consumption is the result of several overlapping ideological mechanisms or tactics employed by lead electronics firms to create quiescence among its consumer base. Using impression management theory, I ask whether electronics firms use divisionary reframing tactics to shift attention away from their detrimental business practices, thereby legitimizing themselves in the eyes of the public. Biography: Lucy McAllister completed her M.Sc. in environmental studies at CU in May 2013, and has continued within the environmental studies program to pursue a PhD. She is now a PhD Candidate, and has recently been adjunct lecturing at Babson College. Broadly, Lucy explores the business-society-environment relationship, focusing on the role of lead electronic firms in the human and environmental harms of the electronics commodity chain. In the fall of 2013, Lucy was awarded a Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences Graduate Research Fellowship. Lucy\u2019s first public outreach article, \u201cThe Human and Environmental Effects of E-waste\u201d was published by the Population Reference Bureau (PRB) in 2013, and the Health and Human Rights Journal published Lucy\u2019s first co-authored academic article, \u201cWomen, E-waste & Technological Solutions to Climate Change\u201d in June 2014. Together with Nnenia Campbell and Liam Downey, Lucy has a forthcoming article, \u201cInvisible While in Plain Sight: The World Bank in the New York Times\" at Sociology of Development. location CSTPR Conference Room, 1333 Grandview Avenue Event TypeCSTPR resources Directions to CSTPR 2016-03-04 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Analytical Chemistry Seminar: Lucas Algrim Analytical Chemistry Seminar: Lucas Algrim Analytical & Environmental Chemistry Division and Atmospheric Chemistry Program Seminar Jointly sponsored by the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, CIRES, and the Environmental Program Effect of a Functional Group on SOA Yields and Particle Composition\u00a0from OH Radical Initiated Reactions of Alkanes in the Presence of NOx by Lucas Algrim -\u00a0Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,\u00a0University of Colorado Boulder In a series of laboratory experiments we have identified major products and determined SOA yields from the reactions of C10\u00a0alcohol and C12\u00a0ketone position-isomers with OH radicals in the presence of NOx.\u00a0\u00a0Reactions were studied with a particle beam mass spectrometer (PBMS), gas chromatograph with flame ionization detection (GC-FID), and a scanning mobility particle sizer (SMPS), among other instruments.\u00a0\u00a0Functional group position had a considerable effect on SOA yields, which is fully explainable by the fate of alkoxy radical intermediates and vapor pressures of resulting products.\u00a0 Important observed differences from alkane chemistry were enhanced decomposition via \u03b1-cleavage, ability of the preexisting ketone to play a role in cyclic hemiacetal formation, and significantly hindered isomerization when the ketone was part of the transition-state ring. location CIRES Fellows Room, Ekeley S274 2016-03-07 CSTPR Seminar: Reiner Grundmann CSTPR Seminar: Reiner Grundmann Media Coverage of Climate Change in a Comparative Perspective by Reiner Grundmann \u00a0-\u00a0Science and Technology Studies, University of Nottingham Abstract: Climate change is a global process which is addressed by international institutions but receives different responses in different countries. Countries differ, economically, politically, and culturally. However, much research is conducted on a national basis. This is entirely reasonable given the resource restrictions, both in terms of linguistic competence and amount of data. But it is not adequate for the challenge to understand the differences and commonalities of news reporting across countries. In this talk I will present findings from a comparison of the newspaper coverage of climate change in France, Germany, the UK, and the USA. This research is based on corpus linguistics methodology. I will show that the discourse in these four countries is different in that the press uses different terms to describe the problem, and that it assigns different meanings to these terms. Different domestic policy issues drive the climate change discourse. I will also show who the main claims makers in the media are and that so-called skeptical voices are by far in the minority. Biography: Reiner Grundmann is Professor of Science and Technology Studies at the University of Nottingham (UK). He has a long standing interest in sustainability and global environmental problems. His research explores the relation between knowledge and decision making, the role of expertise and public discourses,\u00a0and comparative media analysis across countries and issues. He is also part of a large interdisciplinary project on urban sustainability, comparing the cities of Nottingham, Stuttgart, Chengdu and Shanghai. He is a author of numerous papers and books, co-author of the Hartwell Paper for a reorientation of\u00a0climate policy,\u00a0and blogger at Klimazwiebel. He tweets as @ReinerGrundmann. location CSTPR Conference Room, 1333 Grandview Avenue Event TypeCSTPR resources Webcast (enter as guest) 2016-03-09 Cryospheric and Polar Processes Seminar: Andrew Barrett Cryospheric and Polar Processes Seminar: Andrew Barrett How much water do glaciers and snow cover contribute to runoff from High Mountain Asia? by Andrew Barrett -\u00a0NSIDC/CIRES,\u00a0University of Colorado Boulder location RL-2 (on East Campus) room 155 2016-03-09 CGA Lunch Seminar: Use your online presence to get a job and further your career goals CGA Lunch Seminar: Use your online presence to get a job and further your career goals On Friday, March 1 from noon to 1pm in CIRES S274,\u00a0Susan Sullivan of CIRES Outreach and Matthew Price and Nate Campbell from CIRES IT will lead a seminar on how to set up a researcher profile on the new CIRES website. They will discuss strategies and best practices on how your should present yourself and your career online and the role your online portrait should play in your job search. Lunch will be provided from Half-Fast subs. If you'd like to set up your researcher profile before the seminar, follow these instructions: Navigate to:\u00a0http://cires.colorado.edu/about/institutional-programs/cires-graduate-as... Click on the \"Create a profile\" button on the right side of the screen Enter your identikey. CIRES IT will then need to approve your profile. Then you'll be free to start editing your CIRES personal page. Please bring a laptop to the seminar if you have one. location CIRES S274 Event TypeCGA Amenities Lunch provided contact Jordan Krechmer 2016-03-11 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 CMC Meeting Mar. 14, 2016 CMC Meeting Mar. 14, 2016 CMC Meeting, March 14, 2016 The Taj Restaurant In attendance:\u00a0 Christina Holt, Chance Sterling, Amanda Morton, Rick Tisinai, Allen Pope, Craig Hartsough, Nate Campbell, Lucia Harrop, Carrie Morrill, Carrie Wall (prospective new CMC member), Antoniette Capotonoli (new from PSD!), Anne Perring (Quorum was met \u2013 12 out of 18 members) \u2022 12:00 noon \u2013 the group got food Called to order at 12:26pm CIRES Review \u2013 April 19-21st. Lucia said this is the first time a review has ever been held in advance of the new contract. Posters are needed by the 19th. Kristen wants 10 CMC members to attend the Review at the reception on the evening of April 19th. Christina suggested having the reps meet and get their information organized. Lucia suggested that we give Kristen the list of reps, and see how that goes. Lucia said there will be no tech needs, other than presentations with the screens and slides. It will be closed to the public. Christina made a list of prospective CMC representative attendees. News flash: the meeting may be rescheduled! Directors\u2019 Award \u2013 none will happen this year since the criteria still has not been well-defined. OPA update from Christina \u2013 Chris Clack reported that the first set of deadlines have been achieved, and there are 10 nominations, some of them groups. Nate said that the notification of the committee to see the nominations. Outside judges have not been selected, but a list is being made. OPA by-laws suggestion: the names of the committee should be secret? How protected? Nate did not reveal the names of the OPA committee. Chris will meet with the next chairperson on the updates. The box of old OPA notes and ideas was delivered to Chris for review. The goal is to update all the possible conflicts and rules. CIRES Directors request for Rendezvous poster submissions \u2013 Rick: no quotas, just what will represent the science. Up to now, it looks like around 108 posters. Nate noted that those that don\u2019t have insideCIRES web access, just contact CIRES IT. The CIRES Fellows have been getting their grad students to submit posters. Discussion: Rick: is this a new trend for which CMC and/or CIRES IT is not prepared? Lucia and Rick: how do we navigate this poster submission without the Division directors input? Allen \u2013 the Science Advisor could give approval for a poster for that Division. Group discussion: Can the Directors have any input on the vetting/approval process? What do they do to handle this if anything? Anne suggested that the CMC, when there is an overflow of posters, get back to the Directors? Christina \u2013 what about having the CU and NOAA Labs oversee this submission? Allen \u2013 what if a scientist had an Outreach poster? Christina - does that imply a submission to be reviewed by the corresponding Director? Also category for the web submission. It was determined that these (and other questions) will be considered by the OPA committee after the 2016 Rendezvous. Committees: \u2022 OPA \u2013 already discussed. \u2022 Rendezvous Committee: no big updates at this point. There will be a touch base meeting at the end of March. By-Laws Committee \u2013 Rick handed out a document that highlighted the proposed changes. Christina asked if a deadline might be included in the By-Laws for the CMC meeting announcement? Nate described the possibility of having a publicly-facing web page that would have announcements, including the CMC Meeting. \u2022 A web liason needs to be included in the By-Laws as an elected position. \u2022 Rendezvous committee can be defined in the \u201cCommittees\u201d section of the By-Laws. \u2022 Committee chairs will have web page access for their committees, to be overseen by the web liason. \u2022 Chance \u2013 the Membership Chair position can oversee the content for the CMC public page. Lucia is currently the web liason. A vote was proposed by Rick and seconded by Chance: Shall the CMC have a public facing page that does not require a login? (Christina asked if our faces and profiles could be included? Nate said yes.) It was unanimously voted Yes New prospective members \u2013 Carrie WallBell (NCEI)and Antonietta Capotonoli (PSD)! Chance has asked them to attend as guests, then will meet with them and if they want to join. If they are interested, he will meet with them to explain their role as a member of the CMC. There was no Executive Committee meeting in February or March. date Monday, March 14, 2016 12:00pm 2016-03-14 CSTPR Seminar: Sam Schramski CSTPR Seminar: Sam Schramski A Real Pol\u00eamica: An Approach to Scientific Controversy and its Uncertain Reach by Sam Schramski Abstract: This talk will present preliminary research on a Center project seeking to analyze cases of scientific controversy. While the project is focused on the United States at present, the expectation is to broaden the scope to a comparative analysis with Brazil, which is only tangentially part of the proposed project at present. The expectation is to better to understand: 1) the drivers of social constructions and public opinion related to contentious areas under scientific inquiry, and 2) the degree to which social constructions, public opinion, science (or scientists), or political factors such as focusing events, play greater or lesser roles in promoting policy change to solve these problems. Through the study of such controversies, we hope to ascertain the social dimensions of scientific issues, and drawing from various social science fields such as political science and public policy, propose to link those social constructions to policy outcomes. The proposed project will analyze U.S. state-level social constructions and policymaking using the cases of 1) climate change and 2) childhood vaccine adoption to provide a multi-jurisdictional comparative research design, but this talk will present some novelty by approaching the cases of climate change and Zika virus in the Brazilian context. Biography: Dr. Sam Schramski is a visiting postdoctoral scholar from the Federal University of Amazonas in Manaus, Brazil, and is based out the Graduate Program in Amazonian Society and Culture. He has a PhD in Interdisciplinary Ecology from the University of Florida. Sam has research interests in local and community-level climate change adaptation in the developing world, particularly in the Brazilian Amazon and southern Africa. He spent 2014 working on a field project that included perceptions of climate change amongst riverine populations living in Amazonian flooded forests. Sam is also a freelance journalist, having produced radio stories for NPR and Radio France International, and written blog posts for Brasil Post, Brazil's Huffington Post affiliate. Sam will be affiliated with CSTPR and the Center for Environmental Journalism throughout 2015. location CSTPR Conference Room, 1333 Grandview Avenue Event TypeCSTPR resources Webcast (enter as guest) 2016-03-16 Cryospheric and Polar Processes Seminar: Allen Pope Cryospheric and Polar Processes Seminar: Allen Pope Progress on a Landsat 8 Mosaic of Antarctica by Dr. Allen Pope - NSIDC/CIRES, University of Colorado Boulder location RL-2 (on East Campus) room 155 National Snow and Ice Data Center 2016-03-16 Comedy for Climate Change Comedy for Climate Change Comedy for Climate Change Standing Up for Climate: An Experiment with Creative Climate Comedy Humor is a tool underutilized, and comedy has the power to effectively connect with people about climate change issues. Our event is associated with the Spring 2016 \u2018Creative Climate Communication' course (ENVS3173/THTR4173) and the larger 'Inside the Greenhouse' project. location Black Box Experimental Studio - ATLAS Building, CU Boulder Event TypeCSTPR resources Inside the Greenhouse 2016-03-17 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 1 2 Analytical Chemistry Seminar: Demetrios Pagonis Analytical Chemistry Seminar: Demetrios Pagonis Analytical & Environmental Chemistry Division and Atmospheric Chemistry Program Seminar Jointly sponsored by the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, CIRES, and the Environmental Program Chemistry of Multifunctional Hydroperoxides in Secondary Organic Aerosol by Demetrios Pagonis - Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado Boulder Multifunctional hydroperoxides have been identified as a product of autoxidation reactions and have been proposed as structures for extremely low volatility compounds (ELVOCs) observed in secondary organic aerosol. The chemistry of these hydroperoxides is complex and challenging to study, as many conventional analytical techniques disturb the peroxide functionality and cause additional chemistry to occur. In this work we are able to produce multifunctional hydroperoxides in environmental chamber reactions as well as in solution, allowing us to investigate their chemistry under a variety of conditions. Observed intramolecular reactions, reactions with water, acid-catalyzed acetal formation and acid-catalyzed peroxyacetal formation are all discussed. location CIRES Fellows Room, Ekeley S274 2016-03-28 Cryospheric and Polar Processes Seminar: William Colgan Cryospheric and Polar Processes Seminar: William Colgan New paradigm for attributing recent Greenland ice loss by Dr. William Colgan -\u00a0Lassonde School of Engineering\u00a0at York University Abstract: There is a growing interest in the partition of recent Greenland Ice Sheet mass loss between surface balance and ice dynamic components. While assessing the contemporary magnitude and spatial distribution of these transient mass balance components is critical to calculating recent mass loss, it is equally important to understand the magnitude and spatial distribution of these components during the 1961-1990 reference climatology period, against which contemporary components are conventionally differenced to quantify \u201crecent change\u201d. In the past year, however, two longer term mass balance processes have been documented for the first time. On centennial time scales, historical aerial photos and analytical modeling have been used to infer a highly negative post-Little Ice Age mass balance around the ice sheet periphery. On millennial time scales, radiostratigraphy and numerical modeling have been used to infer a subtle positive mass balance due to changes in ice rheology in the ice sheet interior. Together, these processes challenge the assumption of near-equilibrium surface balance and ice dynamic components during reference period that underlies conventional attributions of ice loss. A consequence of acknowledging longer term negative mass balance is that recent mass loss since reference period is substantially less than previously assumed. Partitioning recent ice loss within this alternate paradigm suggests that all recent ice loss can potentially be explained by surface balance alone, without invoking significant changes in ice dynamics since 1990. Examining the spatial distribution of mass loss and mass balance components, however, highlights the perils of solving the ice dynamic component of mass balance as a residual. location RL-2 (on East Campus) room 155 2016-03-30 Current Events SUPPORT CIRES CIRES is a partnership of NOAA and the University of Colorado Boulder. \u00a9 2019 Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences Privacy \u2022 Bylaws \u2022 Legal\u2022 Contact \u2022 Jobs \u2022 Diversity \u2022 InsideCIRES \u2022 log in", "cheerUPDATES (@cheerUPDATES) | Twitter We've detected that JavaScript is disabled in your browser. Would you like to proceed to legacy Twitter? Yes Skip to content Home Home Home, current page. Moments Moments Moments, current page. Search query Search Twitter Saved searches Remove In this conversation Verified accountProtected Tweets\u00a0@ Suggested users Verified accountProtected Tweets\u00a0@ Verified accountProtected Tweets\u00a0@ Language: English Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Catal\u00e0 \u010ce\u0161tina Dansk Deutsch English UK Espa\u00f1ol Filipino Fran\u00e7ais Hrvatski Italiano Magyar Nederlands Norsk Polski Portugu\u00eas Rom\u00e2n\u0103 Sloven\u010dina Suomi Svenska Ti\u1ebfng Vi\u1ec7t T\u00fcrk\u00e7e \u0395\u03bb\u03bb\u03b7\u03bd\u03b9\u03ba\u03ac \u0411\u044a\u043b\u0433\u0430\u0440\u0441\u043a\u0438 \u0435\u0437\u0438\u043a \u0420\u0443\u0441\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439 \u0421\u0440\u043f\u0441\u043a\u0438 \u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0441\u044c\u043a\u0430 \u043c\u043e\u0432\u0430 \u05e2\u05b4\u05d1\u05b0\u05e8\u05b4\u05d9\u05ea \u0627\u0644\u0639\u0631\u0628\u064a\u0629 \u0641\u0627\u0631\u0633\u06cc \u092e\u0930\u093e\u0920\u0940 \u0939\u093f\u0928\u094d\u0926\u0940 \u09ac\u09be\u0982\u09b2\u09be \u0a97\u0ac1\u0a9c\u0ab0\u0abe\u0aa4\u0ac0 \u0ba4\u0bae\u0bbf\u0bb4\u0bcd \u0c95\u0ca8\u0ccd\u0ca8\u0ca1 \u0e20\u0e32\u0e29\u0e32\u0e44\u0e17\u0e22 \ud55c\uad6d\uc5b4 \u65e5\u672c\u8a9e \u7b80\u4f53\u4e2d\u6587 \u7e41\u9ad4\u4e2d\u6587 Have an account? Log in Have an account? Remember me \u00b7 Forgot password? New to Twitter? Sign up cheerUPDATES @cheerUPDATES Tweets Tweets, current page. 79.5K Following Following 1,924 Followers Followers 185K Likes Likes 85.1K More Likes Unmute @cheerUPDATES Mute @cheerUPDATES Follow Follow @cheerUPDATES Following Following @cheerUPDATES Unfollow Unfollow @cheerUPDATES Blocked Blocked @cheerUPDATES Unblock Unblock @cheerUPDATES Pending Pending follow request from @cheerUPDATES Cancel Cancel your follow request to @cheerUPDATES cheerUPDATES @cheerUPDATES Industry Leader in Cheerleading News. United States cheerupdates.com View broadcasts Watch LIVE Joined April 2011 18.1K Photos and videos Photos and videos Tweets Tweets Tweets, current page. Tweets & replies Media You blocked @cheerUPDATES Are you sure you want to view these Tweets? Viewing Tweets won't unblock @cheerUPDATES Yes, view profile Close cheerUPDATES followed Pinned Tweet cheerUPDATES\u200f\u00a0@cheerUPDATES Mar 4 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet As in life, nothing is guaranteed. Each experience, each defeat, and each victory deserves its own moment. #NCAmomentspic.twitter.com/RQBXZIwgAn Central Jersey, CJA Bombshells and NCA 1 reply 88 retweets 556 likes Reply 1 Retweet 88 Retweeted 88 Like 556 Liked 556 Show this thread Show this thread Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo cheerUPDATES\u200f\u00a0@cheerUPDATES 2h2 hours ago More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet NEW MUSIC RELEASE by Producer @Audiogoldpro East Tennessee Cheer - Royal Cats \u201cSo Royal better BOW DOWN to these CATS Yeah all you other Kitties don\u2019t compare and that\u2019s a facthttps://youtu.be/aMEKKbpH7j8 0 replies 1 retweet 8 likes Reply Retweet 1 Retweeted 1 Like 8 Liked 8 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo cheerUPDATES\u200f\u00a0@cheerUPDATES 3h3 hours ago More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet This weekend in Orlando, FL - #UCAallstar 67 Teams Competing for: 5 Paid Bids 11 At Large Bids See the team list, Bid declaration, and schedule here https://cheerupdates.com/uca-international-all-star-championship/\u00a0\u2026 0 replies 6 retweets 16 likes Reply Retweet 6 Retweeted 6 Like 16 Liked 16 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo cheerUPDATES\u200f\u00a0@cheerUPDATES 3h3 hours ago More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet This weekend in Washington, DC - #BATC 39 Teams Competing for: 3 Paid Bids 7 At Large Bids See the team list and schedule here https://cheerupdates.com/coastal-corporation-battle-at-the-capitol/\u00a0\u2026 0 replies 2 retweets 13 likes Reply Retweet 2 Retweeted 2 Like 13 Liked 13 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo cheerUPDATES\u200f\u00a0@cheerUPDATES 3h3 hours ago More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet NEW MUSIC RELEASE By @New_Level_Music Producer @TwistedCutz Cheer Florida Goddesses IO6 \u201cOn the day when the Goddess reigns , they will know my name. CHEER FLRIDA!\u201dhttps://youtu.be/VoCMINhDx3w 0 replies 8 retweets 16 likes Reply Retweet 8 Retweeted 8 Like 16 Liked 16 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo cheerUPDATES\u200f\u00a0@cheerUPDATES 3h3 hours ago More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet This weekend in Portland, OR - #PACWEST 6 Teams Competing for: 1 Paid Bid 3 At Large Bids See the team list and Performance Order https://cheerupdates.com/pac-west-nationals/\u00a0\u2026 1 reply 1 retweet 11 likes Reply 1 Retweet 1 Retweeted 1 Like 11 Liked 11 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo cheerUPDATES\u200f\u00a0@cheerUPDATES 3h3 hours ago More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet This weekend in Hartford, CT - #SPIRITFEST 27 Teams Competing for: 3 Paid Bids 7 At Large Bids See the team list, Bid declaration, and Performance Order https://cheerupdates.com/spirit-fest-all-star-nationals/\u00a0\u2026 1 reply 7 retweets 17 likes Reply 1 Retweet 7 Retweeted 7 Like 17 Liked 17 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo cheerUPDATES\u200f\u00a0@cheerUPDATES 3h3 hours ago More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet This weekend in Chicago, IL - #GLCC 23 Teams Competing for: 2 Paid Bids 4 At Large Bids See the team list, Bid declaration, and Performance Order https://cheerupdates.com/glcc-the-showdown-grand-nationals/\u00a0\u2026 0 replies 2 retweets 11 likes Reply Retweet 2 Retweeted 2 Like 11 Liked 11 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo cheerUPDATES\u200f\u00a0@cheerUPDATES 3h3 hours ago More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet This weekend in Phoenix, AZ - #ALOHA 9 Teams Competing for: 2 Paid Bids 4 At Large Bids See the team list, Bid declaration, and Performance Order https://cheerupdates.com/aloha-championships/\u00a0\u2026 0 replies 2 retweets 7 likes Reply Retweet 2 Retweeted 2 Like 7 Liked 7 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo cheerUPDATES\u200f\u00a0@cheerUPDATES 7h7 hours ago More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet Congratulations Exceptional Athlete Bid Winners for #CheerWorlds2019 @theccsuns - Super Novas @BuffaloEnvy - Extraordinary @TheMDTwisters - Eye of the Storm Reign Athletics - Dynasty @Rockstar_Cheer - Cinderellapic.twitter.com/N93TzjyEJX 2 replies 30 retweets 135 likes Reply 2 Retweet 30 Retweeted 30 Like 135 Liked 135 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo cheerUPDATES\u200f\u00a0@cheerUPDATES 10h10 hours ago More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet Days Until #CheerWorlds2019 Our Current Bid List https://cheerupdates.com/worlds/worlds-2018-2019-bids/\u00a0\u2026 Past Cheer Worlds Results 2004-2018 https://cheerupdates.com/worlds/worlds-2004-2018-results/\u00a0\u2026 @USASFcheer @The_CheerWorldspic.twitter.com/RowRo2bA5S 0 replies 64 retweets 162 likes Reply Retweet 64 Retweeted 64 Like 162 Liked 162 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo cheerUPDATES Retweeted Tucker Hunter\u200f\u00a0@badmothatucka 22h22 hours ago More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet You\u2019re kidding. @usacheer #jrcoedpic.twitter.com/7kdAupg5MF 8 replies 299 retweets 1,906 likes Reply Retweet Retweeted Like Liked Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo cheerUPDATES\u200f\u00a0@cheerUPDATES Mar 7 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet NEW MUSIC RELEASE by Producer @AudioGoldPro Icon Cheer - Exclusive \u201cYou Wanna Roll with me? Wanna sit in my VIP? Too bad we locked it, Area RESTRICTED\u201dhttps://youtu.be/XMw8KDnVCDc 0 replies 4 retweets 18 likes Reply Retweet 4 Retweeted 4 Like 18 Liked 18 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo cheerUPDATES\u200f\u00a0@cheerUPDATES Mar 7 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet NEW MUSIC RELEASE By @New_Level_Music Producer @BiermanSays @LetsGoRays Electric \u201cThis is our festival ! EDC Electrical !\u201dhttps://youtu.be/ruSxzEBhEuI 0 replies 12 retweets 54 likes Reply Retweet 12 Retweeted 12 Like 54 Liked 54 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo cheerUPDATES Retweeted Tristate Athletics\u200f\u00a0@TStateAthletics Mar 6 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet New Uniforms for Illuminati | Debut for The Cheerleading Worlds New Look 2 Types if Rhinestones Custom Metallic Dye-sub color Lace Over 6,000 rhinestones We are thrilled with the design, and execution by @RebelAthletic More videos on our Instagram!pic.twitter.com/ljHz8Ly5xN 7 replies 38 retweets 402 likes Reply 7 Retweet 38 Retweeted 38 Like 402 Liked 402 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo cheerUPDATES\u200f\u00a0@cheerUPDATES Mar 6 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet NEW MUSIC RELEASE By Producer @AudioGoldPro Extreme Cheer - Extasy \u201cSo Ecstatic when we walk into the Building\u201dhttps://youtu.be/v6R_de_S_Ec 1 reply 2 retweets 11 likes Reply 1 Retweet 2 Retweeted 2 Like 11 Liked 11 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo cheerUPDATES\u200f\u00a0@cheerUPDATES Mar 6 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet NEW MUSIC RELEASE By @New_Level_Music Producer @CheerFreqs OC All Stars - Shadow \u201cYou can\u2019t escape my shadow....\u201dhttps://youtu.be/_N_jLaZdWdw 0 replies 1 retweet 19 likes Reply Retweet 1 Retweeted 1 Like 19 Liked 19 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo cheerUPDATES Retweeted Woodlands Elite\u200f\u00a0@WoodlandsCheer Mar 5 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet WE are hiring for next season! Come be a part of the BEST all-star cheerleading gym in Texas!! JOIN THE MOVEMENT!!pic.twitter.com/ab0oUZxQTS 2 replies 16 retweets 91 likes Reply 2 Retweet 16 Retweeted 16 Like 91 Liked 91 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo cheerUPDATES\u200f\u00a0@cheerUPDATES Mar 5 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet NEW MUSIC RELEASE By Producer @AudioGoldPro Cheer Omega - TKO \u201cYou Just Got Knocked OUT!\u201dhttps://youtu.be/M7mcBY_qKhA 1 reply 3 retweets 21 likes Reply 1 Retweet 3 Retweeted 3 Like 21 Liked 21 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo cheerUPDATES\u200f\u00a0@cheerUPDATES Mar 5 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet NEW MUSIC RELEASE By @New_Level_Music Producer @CheerFreqs STINGRAY ALL STARS - SNIPER RAYS \"We've got the in our sights !\"https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E79o9gTVyNU&feature=youtu.be\u00a0\u2026 2 replies 13 retweets 70 likes Reply 2 Retweet 13 Retweeted 13 Like 70 Liked 70 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo cheerUPDATES Retweeted Twist & Shout\u200f\u00a0@twistandshout1 Mar 5 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet Mark your calendars because tryouts are approaching!! Go online to http://www.shouterspirit.com\u00a0 to register today #TStheBEST #BlueLooksGoodOnYoupic.twitter.com/kNBHhzk8Re 0 replies 10 retweets 32 likes Reply Retweet 10 Retweeted 10 Like 32 Liked 32 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo @cheerUPDATES hasn't Tweeted yet. Back to top \u2191 Loading seems to be taking a while. Twitter may be over capacity or experiencing a momentary hiccup. Try again or visit Twitter Status for more information. New to Twitter? Sign up now to get your own personalized timeline! Sign up You may also like \u00b7 Refresh false \u00a9 2019 Twitter About Help Center Terms Privacy policy Cookies Ads info Close Choose a trend location Dismiss Close Previous Next Close Go to a person's profile Saved searches Remove In this conversation Verified accountProtected Tweets\u00a0@ Suggested users Verified accountProtected Tweets\u00a0@ Verified accountProtected Tweets\u00a0@ Close Promote this Tweet Close Block Cancel Block Tweet with a location You can add location information to your Tweets, such as your city or precise location, from the web and via third-party applications. You always have the option to delete your Tweet location history. Learn more Turn on Not now Close Your lists Close Create a new list List name Description Under 100 characters, optional Privacy Public \u00b7 Anyone can follow this list Private \u00b7 Only you can access this list Save list Close Close Copy link to Tweet Here's the URL for this Tweet. Copy it to easily share with friends. Close Embed this Tweet Embed this Video Add this Tweet to your website by copying the code below. Learn more Add this video to your website by copying the code below. Learn more Hmm, there was a problem reaching the server. Try again? Include parent Tweet Include media By embedding Twitter content in your website or app, you are agreeing to the Twitter Developer Agreement and Developer Policy. Preview Close Why you're seeing this ad Close Log in to Twitter Remember me \u00b7 Forgot password? Don't have an account? Sign up \u00bb Close Sign up for Twitter Not on Twitter? Sign up, tune into the things you care about, and get updates as they happen. Sign up Have an account? Log in \u00bb Close Two-way (sending and receiving) short codes: Country Code For customers of United States 40404 (any) Canada 21212 (any) United Kingdom 86444 Vodafone, Orange, 3, O2 Brazil 40404 Nextel, TIM Haiti 40404 Digicel, Voila Ireland 51210 Vodafone, O2 India 53000 Bharti Airtel, Videocon, Reliance Indonesia 89887 AXIS, 3, Telkomsel, Indosat, XL Axiata Italy 4880804 Wind 3424486444 Vodafone \u00bb See SMS short codes for other countries Close Confirmation Close Close Skip all Welcome home! This timeline is where you\u2019ll spend most of your time, getting instant updates about what matters to you. Tweets not working for you? Hover over the profile pic and click the Following button to unfollow any account. Say a lot with a little When you see a Tweet you love, tap the heart \u2014 it lets the person who wrote it know you shared the love. Spread the word The fastest way to share someone else\u2019s Tweet with your followers is with a Retweet. Tap the icon to send it instantly. Join the conversation Add your thoughts about any Tweet with a Reply. Find a topic you\u2019re passionate about, and jump right in. Learn the latest Get instant insight into what people are talking about now. Get more of what you love Follow more accounts to get instant updates about topics you care about. Find what's happening See the latest conversations about any topic instantly. Never miss a Moment Catch up instantly on the best stories happening as they unfold. Back Next Next Tweet from user", "We use cookies to enhance your experience on our website. By continuing to use our website, you are agreeing to our use of cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. Find out more Cryospheric Science: research framework and disciplinary system | National Science Review | Oxford Academic Skip to Main Content Search Account Menu Menu Sign In Register Navbar Search Filter This issueAll National Science Review All Journals Mobile Microsite Search Term Sign In Register Issues More Content Advance articles Special Topics Publish Author Guidelines Submit Open Access Options Alerts About About National Science Review News Editorial Board Advertising and Corporate Services Journals Career Network Policies Self-Archiving Policy Dispatch Dates Issues More Content Advance articles Special Topics Publish Author Guidelines Submit Open Access Options Alerts About About National Science Review News Editorial Board Advertising and Corporate Services Journals Career Network Policies Self-Archiving Policy Dispatch Dates Close search filter This issueAll National Science Review All Journals search input Advanced Search Article Navigation Close mobile search navigation Article navigation Volume 5 Issue 2 March 2018 Article Contents Abstract INTRODUCTION BASIC CONCEPTS OF CRYOSPHERIC SCIENCE AND INTERACTIONS BETWEEN MULTI-SPHERES RESEARCH FRAMEWORK AND DISCIPLINES OF CRYOSPHERIC SCIENCE ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS REFERENCES < Previous Next > Article Navigation Cryospheric Science: research framework and disciplinary system Dahe Qin State Key Laboratory of Cryospheric Science, Northwest China Ecological Environment and Resource Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou 730000, China Search for other works by this author on: Oxford Academic Google Scholar Dahe Qin Yongjian Ding State Key Laboratory of Cryospheric Science, Northwest China Ecological Environment and Resource Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou 730000, ChinaKey Laboratory of Ecohydrology of Inland River Basin, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou 730000, ChinaUniversity of Chinese Academy Sciences, Beijing 100049, China Corresponding authors. E-mail: dyj@lzb.ac.cn Search for other works by this author on: Oxford Academic Google Scholar Yongjian Ding Cunde Xiao State Key Laboratory of Cryospheric Science, Northwest China Ecological Environment and Resource Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou 730000, China Corresponding authors. E-mail: cdxiao@lzb.ac.cn Search for other works by this author on: Oxford Academic Google Scholar Cunde Xiao Shichang Kang State Key Laboratory of Cryospheric Science, Northwest China Ecological Environment and Resource Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou 730000, China Search for other works by this author on: Oxford Academic Google Scholar Shichang Kang Jianwen Ren State Key Laboratory of Cryospheric Science, Northwest China Ecological Environment and Resource Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou 730000, China Search for other works by this author on: Oxford Academic Google Scholar Jianwen Ren Jianping Yang State Key Laboratory of Cryospheric Science, Northwest China Ecological Environment and Resource Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Lanzhou 730000, China Search for other works by this author on: Oxford Academic Google Scholar Jianping Yang Shiqiang Zhang Shanxi Key Laboratory of Earth Surface System and Environmental Carrying Capacity, Northwest University, Xi' an 710027, ChinaCollege of Urban and Environmental Sciences, Northwest University, Xi' an 710027, China Search for other works by this author on: Oxford Academic Google Scholar Shiqiang Zhang National Science Review, Volume 5, Issue 2, 1 March 2018, Pages 255\u2013268, https://doi.org/10.1093/nsr/nwx108 Published: 08 September 2017 Article history Received: 26 April 2017 Revision Received: 02 July 2017 Accepted: 25 August 2017 Close Split View Views Article contents Figures & tables Video Audio Supplementary Data PDF Cite Citation Dahe Qin, Yongjian Ding, Cunde Xiao, Shichang Kang, Jianwen Ren, Jianping Yang, Shiqiang Zhang; Cryospheric Science: research framework and disciplinary system, National Science Review, Volume 5, Issue 2, 1 March 2018, Pages 255\u2013268, https://doi.org/10.1093/nsr/nwx108 Download citation file: Ris (Zotero) EndNote BibTex Medlars ProCite RefWorks Reference Manager \u00a9 2019 Oxford University Press Close Permissions Share Email Twitter Facebook More Navbar Search Filter This issueAll National Science Review All Journals Mobile Microsite Search Term Sign In Register Close search filter This issueAll National Science Review All Journals search input Advanced Search Abstract Cryospheric changes and their impacts have received increasing concern, extending the research to include the interactions between earth spheres and the impacts of and social adaptation to cryospheric changes. As a result, Cryospheric Science is rapidly developing. However, the research framework of Cryospheric Science has not completely been set up, and the intension and extension of Cryospheric Science are unclear. Following a literature review, the research framework for Cryospheric Science and the discipline components are analysed in this paper. We consider that Cryospheric Science is an inevitable product of international research on the earth and environmental changes as well as on human sustainable development. It will not only strengthen the linkage between the cryosphere and other earth spheres by deepening traditional research areas, but will also bring more focus on the critical roles of the cryosphere in interactions between earth spheres, and will enhance the relationship between cryospheric change and climate, ecology, hydrology, surface environment and sustainable development. The disciplinary tree of Cryospheric Science is developed following the mainstream of change-impacts adaptation. The disciplines of Cryospheric Science were teased out against characteristics of traditional branches and the developing interdisciplinary branches of cryosphere elements, which will provide reference to Cryospheric Science as it systematically grows to maturity. Cryospheric Science, cryosphere, change, framework, disciplinary system INTRODUCTION While the term \u2018cryosphere\u2019 is derived from the Greek \u2018kryos\u2019, studies on the cryosphere has accelerated since 1972 when, at the Stockholm Human Environment Conference, the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) proposed the cryosphere as a fifth earth sphere alongside the atmosphere, hydrosphere, lithosphere and biosphere. Cryosphere research has seen unprecedented development around the world since the start of the twenty-first century. Most importantly, the World Climate Research Programmer (WCRP) launched its core \u2018Climate and Cryosphere\u2019 (CliC) plans in 2000 based on the Arctic Climate System Study (ACSYS), and the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG) made the decision in 2007, unprecedented in its 80-year history, of adding a new association\u2014the International Cryospheric Science Association (IACS)\u2014reflecting the important role of the cryosphere in global climate change. Currently, cryosphere research moves on basically two parallel lines [1]. WCRP-CliC has focused on improving the understanding of the physical processes and feedback mechanisms between the cryosphere and the climate system. Among its key goals is increasing quantitative assessment of the components of cryospheric change and their impacts, led by past and future climate changes, to strengthen the observation and monitoring of the cryosphere. The other line of research is the development of the \u2018Cryospheric Science\u2019 discipline, which will construct a systematic science of the cryosphere.Early in 2005, the Arctic Climate Impact Assessment [2] highlighted the need to research cryospheric change on regional or local scales, due to the close relationship between cryospheric change and human sustainable development. Olav and Richard [3] discussed how to integrate all elements of the cryosphere into one. The concept of \u2018Cryospheric Science\u2019 was proposed at the very beginning of WCRP-CliC [4], to integrate research on glaciers, ice sheets, permafrost, sea ice, lake and river ice, and snow into research on one uniform earth layer. Since then, the depth and the range of studies in cryospheric research continue to grow and develop.To understand its vulnerabilities and the likely adverse impact of multiple interactions, we need to better understand the system's ability to adapt. To do this, we need to study its vulnerability on regional and local scales, which will help us better understand the influence of cryospheric change on humanity, and find reasonable ways to adapt to such changes. French and Slaymaker [5], in their report on studies on cold regions in Canada, have highlighted the relationship between changes in the environment of cold regions and humans. Studies on the Arctic cryosphere at local, regional and global scales [6\u201310] focused on the land ice albedo, snow and sea ice; the impact of changes in ice sheets and glaciers on average global sea level, land surface and geochemical processes of permafrost and carbon emissions; fresh water effects of snow, ice and sea ice; ecological effects of lake ice; and hydrological effects of glaciers, etc. An assessment of six potential tipping elements that affect the European climate [11] suggested that five factors, including the Greenland and West Antarctic ice sheets, the North Atlantic thermohaline circulation, Arctic sea ice, Alpine glaciers and stratospheric ozone in the northern hemisphere, are closely related to the cryosphere. An assessment of China's cryosphere [12] found that cryospheric changes have widely affected the climate, water resources, ecology and the land surface (through cryospheric disasters and land erosion), and that confronting and adapting to cryospheric changes are very challenging. The Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC AR5) considered the influence of cryospheric change on five processes: surface energy budget, water cycle, primary productivity, surface gas exchange and sea-level rise [13]. The IPCC AR5 points out that, in many areas, melting snow is changing hydrological processes, affecting water quantity and quality; that snow disasters are increasing in North America; and that the risk of large-scale abnormal events, such as ice sheet disintegration, permafrost methane release and drought, are increasing. Global sea level is projected to rise by 0.45\u20130.82 m during 2081\u20132100 under the RCP8.5 scenario [14]. In the long term, the unstable Greenland ice sheet and the west Antarctic ice sheet are projected to have a huge impact on global sea level. Additionally, CO2 released from permafrost are projected at 180\u2013910 Gt, and the Arctic Ocean will be almost ice-free in September. Big changes are projected for the northern tundra, and there are currently no effective measures to adapt to these changes. Meanwhile, all infrastructure is vulnerable to the freeze\u2013thaw cycle, and transportation facilities are particularly vulnerable in glacier or permafrost regions [15].This synopsis suggests that research on the cryosphere has focused on the interaction between the cryosphere and climate and, in particular, on the impact of cryospheric changes on global sea level and the freshwater cycle, as well as local water resources, ecological processes and the cold regions land surface. Cryospheric research is not only improving its mechanisms and processes, but is also more concerned with the interactions between the cryosphere and other spheres and the effect of the cryosphere on these interactions. This research suggests that cryospheric studies are developing along the change-impacts-adaptation mainstream, which is also the core of Cryospheric Science, and similar to the trend of international studies on environmental changes, such as the \u2018Future Earth\u2019, which integrates many related international plans on global change and sustainable development [16,17].However, many questions still remain, including: what is Cryospheric Science, its connotation and extent, its composition and framework? Although the term \u2018Cryospheric Science\u2019 has been widely used, and the IACS has been established for many years, these issues lack systematic study.In this paper, the current scientific knowledge of the cryosphere is first summarized; an explanation of the connotation of Cryospheric Science is proposed based on an analysis of its concepts and contents; and the framework and disciplines of Cryospheric Science are briefly outlined. This paper will then provide clear concepts for Cryospheric Science research and for the development of the discipline. BASIC CONCEPTS OF CRYOSPHERIC SCIENCE AND INTERACTIONS BETWEEN MULTI-SPHERES Cryosphere and Cryospheric Science Before we list the concepts of Cryospheric Science, we need to outline the development of the concept of the cryosphere itself. The Earth's cryosphere can be seen as a variety of snow and ice formations [18,19] or taken as the earth spheres made of frozen water, including glaciers, ice cover, snow cover, sea ice, lake and river ice, permafrost and solid precipitation, etc. [5,20]. In the Encyclopedia of Astrobiology, the definition of the cryosphere has been expanded to encompass the earth layer with low temperatures and frozen water, which includes cold desert [21]. In the Encyclopedia of the Paleoclimatology and Ancient Environment, the definition of the cryosphere consists of six elements: snow cover, sea ice, permafrost, lake ice and river ice, mountain glaciers, small ice caps and ice in clouds [22].Despite some differences in definitions of the cryosphere, the cryosphere mainly includes glaciers, ice caps, snow cover, sea ice, lake and river ice, and permafrost. The permafrost is one of the most important components, as it is the most widely distributed cryosphere element. The International Permafrost Association (IPA) defines permafrost as rock and soil layers with a temperature at or below 0\u00b0C for at least two continuous years\u2014a definition that depends on temperature only without reference to soil moisture and is contradictory to the definition of the cryosphere as \u2018Earth's surface frozen water\u2019.From these definitions, we can divide the Earth's cryosphere into three types\u2014continental, marine and aerial\u2014according to the dynamic and thermal conditions in the formation, development and geographical distribution of cryosphere elements. The continental cryosphere is entirely composed of land-based elements, including glaciers (and ice sheets), snow and frozen soil (seasonally frozen soil, permafrost and underground ice, but not permafrost under the sea), and lake and river ice. The marine cryosphere includes sea ice, ice shelves, as well as permafrost under the sea. The aerial cryosphere is composed of frozen water in the atmosphere, including snowflakes, ice crystals, etc. Study of the aerial cryosphere also belongs to atmospheric meteorology; it falls at an intersection of two disciplines, but each has different focuses.No exact definition of \u2018Cryospheric Science\u2019 currently exists. However, its research object is relatively clear, and its research scope has become more extensive. Here, Cryospheric Science is defined as the study of the development and evolution of the cryosphere and of mechanisms of interaction between the cryosphere and other earth spheres, especially the impact of the cryosphere on other spheres and human adaptations to that impact. Cryospheric Science includes: (i) the mechanisms of formation, development and evolution of elements of the cryosphere and the interactions between them; (ii) the interaction between the each element and the overall cryosphere and other earth spheres (atmosphere, hydrosphere, lithosphere and biosphere); and (iii) the impact and risk of cryospheric change on other earth spheres and the relationship between the cryosphere and society and sustainable development, especially adaptation and counter measures to address cryospheric changes on global and regional scales (Fig. 1). Figure 1.View largeDownload slideInteraction between the cryosphere and other earth spheres.Figure 1.View largeDownload slideInteraction between the cryosphere and other earth spheres.Note that interaction between the cryosphere and other earth spheres refers to intersections in which the cryosphere plays a major role (Fig. 1). Clearly, the main body of research is the cryosphere and involves only closely interrelated parts, rather than those that are outside the intersections, excluding those studies on the \u2018cryosphere region\u2019 that lack a direct link with the cryosphere itself. Interactions between the cryosphere and other earth spheres Much of the literature on cryosphere research is focused on the laws governing the cryosphere itself, though more and more studies highlight the role of the cryosphere in its interactions with other earth spheres, which is the main driver of rapidly developing cryosphere science. Thus, it is necessary to discuss here the focus of studies on the interactions between the cryosphere and other earth spheres. Cryosphere and atmosphere Interactions between the cryosphere and the atmosphere mainly include the impacts of climate change on the cryosphere and feedback of cryospheric change on the climate. Traditionally in cryosphere research, impacts of climate change on the cryosphere, or the responses of the cryosphere to climate change, are given as the impact of climate change on its formation and evolutionary processes on various spatial and temporal scales. Feedback from the cryosphere to the atmosphere refers to how cryospheric change in turn affects global climate change\u2014the main concern of both Arctic Climate System(ACSYS) and World Climate Research Programme-Climate and Cryosphere (WCRP-CliC) [20]. Implementation of ACSYS and WCRP-CliC plans has promoted rapidly developing studies on the impact of cryospheric changes on climate and deepened the understanding of the feedback of cryospheric change on climate.Important issues in the interaction between the cryosphere and the atmosphere include: understanding the mechanisms of physical processes and feedbacks; improving the simulation and coupling of cryosphere processes into climate or earth system models; and quantitative evaluation of the role of the cryosphere in global and regional climate change, improving the scientific understanding of the climate system and mitigating the uncertainties in climate models. Feedbacks from the cryosphere to the Earth's climate is important in terms of the cryosphere changing the global or regional water balance, which affects global energy and water distribution and eventually leads to global climate change. The effect ranges from variations in snow cover and permafrost that change the land surface energy balance, to impacts of continental ice and sea ice on global albedo and the ocean thermohaline circulation. The spatial scales can be global (both sea and land), hemispheric (e.g. snow cover change in the northern hemisphere), regional (e.g. the Qinghai-Tibet plateau cryosphere, the polar cryosphere) and the temporal scales vary from seasonal, annual, interdecadal to centennial, millennial and even longer [1,13]. The impacts of the cryosphere on climate include [5]: (i) high surface reflectivity (albedo); (ii) the fact that all three phases of water (solid, liquid and vapor) coexist over a range of temperatures and pressures; and (iii) the large amount of latent heat associated with phase changes between water and ice. These suggest that the cryosphere has a strong impact upon surface energy balance. The presence or absence of snow or ice at the global scale is closely linked to temperature differences that affect global winds and the ocean thermohaline circulations. Cryosphere and biosphere Interactions between the cryosphere and biosphere occur both on the land and in the marine environment. Cryospheric changes on land affect the status of soil water and its temperature, and also the temperature, nutrients and quality of water bodies, and thus the ecological system. Changes in terrestrial ecosystems affect the survival of cryospheric components, especially permafrost, which is significantly affected by vegetation\u2014vegetation degradation is not conducive to permafrost maintenance. The cold and fresh water supply from the melting of the cryosphere into the ocean also changes the temperature and salinity of the ocean, which affects not only ocean circulation, but also the marine ecosystem. Plus, sea ice itself is habitat of some special species. Cryospheric changes have particularly important impacts on marine ecosystems in polar regions.The impacts of cryospheric changes on ecosystems and biogeochemical cycles in the Arctic, Antarctic, and plateau and alpine areas have received extensive attention [23\u201338]. Research on cryosphere ecology focuses on the interactions between the cryosphere and the biosphere, the degree to which and how cryospheric change impacts the distribution patterns of terrestrial and marine ecosystems as the climate changes, and whether the impacts have spatial\u2013temporal thresholds [27,39].How, and to what extent, changes in permafrost impact the carbon cycle are also important issues of concern to the scientific community [40]. The permafrost carbon pool is more than twice that of the atmosphere and falls in between the vegetation and soil carbon pools in volume [41]. As the climate warms, permafrost degradation will accelerate losses of carbon from the permafrost [42\u201344]. Because of this, there is increasing concern about and study of the storage, transformation and release rate of carbon in permafrost [45\u201354]. But, because variations in the permafrost carbon pool are influenced by a variety of factors, accurate estimates of changes in it and its influence on global climate have met challenges. How much carbon is likely to be released from permafrost, over what time scale and when the permafrost carbon pool changes from sink to source are critical issues of concern [41,44,55]. How to construct a communication mechanism of permafrost degradation-carbon fluxes-adapted measures between scientists and policy-makers is the focus of future studies [56]. Cryosphere and hydrosphere On a global scale, cryospheric changes cause global sea-level change and also global water-cycle processes. Cryospheric changes impact the ocean\u2013freshwater balance, which drives the ocean thermohaline circulation, and thus global ocean circulation. On a regional or, even more importantly, a catchment scale, cryospheric changes affect hydrological processes not only in the increase or decrease of runoff, but also in its seasonal distribution, thereby affecting the use of water resources.Because of their important role in the global water cycle, studies on cryospheric hydrological processes have received attention [37,40,57,58]. At present, the focus of studies on cryosphere hydrology is mainly on: (i) the impact of changes in glaciers on meltwater and river runoff [36,37,57,58]; (ii) hydrological effects of permafrost [59\u201364]; (iii) impacts of the cryosphere on large-scale hydrological processes [65\u201368]; and (iv) the impacts of climate change on snow hydrology as well as the application of updated remote sensing data and technology and modeling of processes at multiple scales [69\u201378].However, because of the big differences in temporal and spatial scales of the hydrological effect of changes in various cryospheric components (glaciers, ice sheets, snow cover, sea ice, permafrost), there is still a lack of adequate understanding of their complex hydrological effects. Moreover, answering when the long-term meltwater discharge will reach its tipping point is now the focus of attention over the various mountainous regions. The time range of this tipping point for a single glacier can be derived through observation and simulation; however, the sensitivity and response of processes to climate change vary greatly between glaciers, depending on orientation, sizes and topography (e.g. shading) in a basin. Therefore, to determine the glacial meltwater processes and the meltwater tipping point on the basin scale, we need breakthrough innovations in theory, methods and technology [1]. Meanwhile, the physical, chemical and biological processes corresponding to hydrological processes are rarely taken into consideration. Thus, taking the whole cryosphere basin as a study area, future studies will focus on how to systemically consider the hydrological process of each cryospheric element. These include its effect on river runoff, while also considering the hydrological process of various land uses/land covers to provide a reliable basis for accurately analysing the water source, hydrological processes and runoff changes, reducing the uncertainty of forecasting future changes, and improving the precision and capacity for prediction. Cryosphere and lithosphere Studies on interactions between the cryosphere and lithosphere mainly focus on soil erosion and frost-weather alterations. Snow, ice and freeze-thaw-cycle erosion is one of the most striking dynamic processes of the transformation of the lithosphere. Additionally, loose sediments from rapid and intense erosion processes of the cryosphere enable the formation of glacier debris flow and glacial lake outburst floods, which come with high risks to humans [79\u201383].Cryospheric changes have directly shaped land surfaces through freeze\u2013thaw erosion, frost weathering, and transportation and deposition processes, strongly enhancing the formation of surface geomorphology. Modern land surface processes in the cryosphere and in environments in cold regions, and the impacts of climate change on physical, chemical and biological processes in cold regions are very important scientific issues. The long-term impacts of glacial erosion and the process and strength of frost erosion on the environments in these regions are areas of study that should be developed in the future [84,85].Cryospheric changes directly affect the frequency, extent, and spatial and temporal scales of the impact of glacier and permafrost hazards, including glacier lake outburst floods, glacial debris flow, wind-blown snow, avalanches, blizzards, freezing rain, freeze\u2013thaw hazards, and river and sea-ice disasters. The study of cryosphere hazards is focused on formation processes and mechanisms, and the interaction between the environment and the hazard [83,86]. With climate change and rapid economic development, the degree of disaster exposure is higher, thus these hazards are occurring with higher frequency. Studies of their mechanisms and their prediction, as well as early warning and prevention measures, are needed and have become important scientific issues. Risk assessments of potential hazards are also required.In geomorphic terms, mass exchanges of sediment are modulated by the ratio of the mean magnitude of barriers to change (available sediments) to the mean magnitudes of the disturbing forces (e.g. snowmelt runoff, jokulhlaups, glacier erosional power). Cryospheric change induced either by human activity or by natural climate variabilities can generate rapid landscape changes both at the local scale and, in a cumulative sense, at the global scale. Globally, glacial and periglacial mountain environments are vulnerable to the effects of ongoing climate change. Changes in these environments show complex and non-linear responses to climate change, affected by time lags, feedback and antecedent factors, including geologic control and its history. Therefore, future research will focus on the potential change in mountain glaciers and the periglacial environment's response to global warming, as well as the impact of these changes on hydrology and the ecology of the biosphere (biodiversity and ecosystem services, sustainable agriculture and water resources), the human environment (cultural and heritage landscapes and social/economic activities) and the impact on policy and planning downstream [3,84,85]. Cryosphere and anthroposphere The cryosphere is closely related to the anthroposphere. Cryospheric changes not only affect ecology, water resources, the handling, storing and redistribution of land surface materials, but also cryosphere disasters (such as glacial lake outburst floods, heaving and thawing, lake and river ice, wind-blown snow and frozen rain) affect socio-economic development and threaten people's lives and property. Conversely, human activities also affect the status and fate of the cryosphere. Activities such as construction in permafrost areas and resource extraction will accelerate permafrost thawing in the absence of any protection measures. Similarly, glacier tourism promotes the development of the local economy even while it affects the environment of the glacier and might even contribute to accelerating glacier retreat. The influence of the cryosphere spreads from the poles, North and South America, Asia, Europe and Africa, etc., affecting different regions and issues from fresh water and ecology, to various disasters [7,8,10,40].Overall, the cryosphere has both positive and negative effects on natural and societal systems. Positive influences mainly derive from the benefits provided by the cryosphere [86], such as the key roles of the cryosphere in maintaining ecosystems and regulating water resources. The cryosphere is also an important tourism resource [88,89]. Regional energy development, germplasm resources and protection of animal habitat in cryosphere regions can not be separated from the support of cryosphere science, and the unique culture and religion of cryosphere regions are an important part of human civilization [10,90]. To date, the function and values of cryosphere services\u2014the various benefits that human society directly or indirectly derives from the cryosphere, including resources, products and benefits obtained from it\u2014have neither been fully described nor well evaluated [87,91].The negative effects of cryospheric changes are mainly due to cryosphere hazards, such as avalanches, glacier debris flows, meltwater floods, frost swelling and thaw sinking, and the impact of melting and collapse on structure, and the land surface, etc., as well as other negative influences. Among them, the impact of sea-level rise on coastal areas, the impact of Arctic permafrost thawing on coastal erosion, snow hazards and low temperature, snow and ice disasters, the adverse effects of cryospheric changes on ecosystems and the reduction of fresh water from ice and snow resources in arid and mountain areas are the most essential ones.The change in extent and condition of sea ice is likely to impede human access for hunting marine mammals. Although Arctic residents have a history of adapting to change, the complex interlinkage among societal, economic and political factors and climatic and cryospheric stresses represent unprecedented challenges for northern communities, particularly if the rate of change becomes faster than the capability of social systems to adapt [35]. Many species and ecosystems with limited adaptive capacity are subject to very high risks with an additional warming of 2\u00b0C, particularly in the area of the Arctic Ocean covered by sea ice [40].Human adaptation in the context of global climate change typically involves systematic processes, action and the ability to better respond to, manage and adjust to changing conditions, pressures, disasters, risks and opportunities. Studies on adaptation to the effects of cryospheric changes are just beginning, and relevant publications are limited [92]. However, the cryospheric change is only the change of a special part of global change. Concepts of vulnerability, risk, resilience and adaptation to climate change also can directly be used or be a guide to similar studies of the cryosphere [93]. Such studies mainly focus on how to assess the vulnerability and adaptability of the cryosphere itself, then plan for adaptation measures to cryospheric changes for human beings [93\u201397]. Risk assessments on the impact of cryospheric changes and cost\u2013benefit analysis to adapt to the influence of cryospheric changes will be explored (Fig. 2). Figure 2.View largeDownload slideRelationship between the cryosphere and sustainable development.Figure 2.View largeDownload slideRelationship between the cryosphere and sustainable development.With regard to cryospheric benefits, studies are mainly on services (freshwater resources, germplasm resources, etc.), regulation (climate, runoff and ecological regulation), culture (tourism and sports, religions and unique culture) and habitat [87]. New studies will focus on the evolution of the benefits of cryosphere water resources, the tipping point of function changes, the threshold of service function loss, and the industrial structure adjustment path and functional zone to adapt to cryospheric change. Core scientific issues include a methodology framework for studying cryosphere service functions, a method to assess cryosphere dynamic resources, and the quantitative expression and projection of cryosphere service functions. RESEARCH FRAMEWORK AND DISCIPLINES OF CRYOSPHERIC SCIENCE Framework of Cryospheric Science There are three main aspects of Cryospheric Science: cryosphere processes, mechanisms and changes; the impact of cryospheric change; and adaptation to cryospheric change. These gradually advance from basic research to applied basic research, then to applied research, and the effect of the applied research depends on the depth of the scientific understanding of the basic research. The cryosphere scientific research framework can be represented in a Cryospheric Science Tree (CST, Fig. 3). Figure 3.View largeDownload slideSchematic map of Cryospheric Science Tree (CST).Figure 3.View largeDownload slideSchematic map of Cryospheric Science Tree (CST).The first and foremost study of basic research of Cryospheric Science is the energy and water balance processes and mechanisms of the cryosphere (lowest layer of CST). Basic cryosphere research focuses on monitoring the dynamic water and energy mechanisms of its elements, its evolution and current processes, and so on. Applied basic research mainly focuses on the impact of changes in the cryosphere on climate, ecology, hydrology, global sea level, surface processes and on cryosphere-related disasters (third layer of CST). Applied research studies the vulnerability and risk resulting from those changes as well as resilience and adaptation to change, especially with regard to sustainable development on global, regional or local scales (top layer of CST).In summary, along with the development of earth system science, climate change science and sustainable development science, Cryospheric Science itself developed very rapidly; the core issues of Cryospheric Science come from a system perspective to study each element of the cryosphere itself, the relationship between elements, and the relationship between the cryosphere and other earth spheres. The scientific goal of cryosphere science is to understand the natural and anthropogenic processes, mechanisms and impacts and the application of socio-economy to the cryosphere. Cryospheric Science disciplinary structure Cryospheric Science is very interdisciplinary and is related to many earth science branches and beyond, including studies of the atmosphere, hydrosphere, biosphere, lithosphere and anthroposphere. Measures and methods of research include principles and advanced technologies in mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology, humanities and social sciences. The objective of Cryospheric Science is to study not only the cryosphere itself, but also the interactions between the cryosphere and other earth spheres. Therefore, the branches of Cryospheric Science (Fig. 4) are closely related to the subjects of cryospheric elements and the relationship between the cryosphere and the other earth spheres. The development and improvement of these branches will construct the discipline structure of Cryospheric Science. Figure 4.View largeDownload slideDisciplinary structure (system) of Cryospheric Science.Figure 4.View largeDownload slideDisciplinary structure (system) of Cryospheric Science.Mass and energy balance forms the basis of the theory of Cryospheric Science. One of the key processes in the formation and evolutionary processes of the cryosphere is solid\u2013liquid phase transition. When solid ice converts to liquid water in elements of the cryosphere, heat exchange is required. The heat budget process is controlled by the Sun's radiation and the energy balance between the ice surface, ice body and atmosphere. Energy balance is the basic driver underlying glacier advance and retreat, ice sheet change, snow formation and melting, permafrost building and thawing, and sea-ice formation and melting. Movements of cryosphere elements (including phase transition) are continuous; heat and water exchange, solid\u2013liquid phase change and dynamics result in mass changes of the cryosphere itself, leading to the energy or mass changes of other earth spheres. The principle of mass balance is the law of conservation of mass.Traditional cryospheric research involves glaciology; geocryology; Quaternary glaciology; river, lake and sea-ice research; and others. While glaciology includes research on snow, snow is also a major factor to be considered in research on frozen ground and sea ice. Glaciology also includes the studies of lake and river ice.In the study of interactions between the cryosphere and other earth spheres, from the perspective of subject composition, Cryospheric Science includes the disciplines of cryosphere climate, cryosphere hydrology, cryosphere ecology, cryosphere environment and cryosphere sociology. Some of these disciplines are far from mature, but some related issues have received more attention; our understanding and awareness constantly deepen, and the need for system-wide basic and applied scientific studies on the relationship between the cryosphere and other earth spheres has increased greatly. Thus, we propose them as branch disciplines of Cryospheric Science, which not only meets the practical need and trend of the development of international studies, but also the trend for promoting Cryospheric Science systematically grows to maturity.Cryosphere hydrology is relatively developed among the branches of Cryospheric Science. Although the term \u2018cryosphere hydrology\u2019 has not been widely used in international research, glacier hydrology, permafrost hydrology, snow hydrology, as well as other similar disciplines have had a long history [98] and the similar term \u2018cold region hydrology\u2019 is already widely used. The book entitled Permafrost Hydrology [98] covers not only permafrost hydrology, but also snow cover, glaciers, lake and river ice, wetlands in cold regions, as well as cryosphere hydrological processes, which actually reflects the underlying idea of \u2018cryosphere hydrology\u2019.In comparison with cryosphere hydrology, cryosphere ecology, cryosphere environment and cryosphere sociology, although developed to different degrees, are still in an early stage of development as systematic disciplines. This is especially true of cryosphere sociology, whose research subject of social and economic sustainable development in areas impacted by cryospheric changes has only recently become an area of concern, and has limited literature.The basic disciplines of Cryospheric Science include geography, atmospheric sciences, geomorphology, hydrology, ecology, environment and sociology. Advanced technology and computer technology, in particular remote sensing (RS), Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and Global Positioning System (GPS) technology, play an important role in promoting Cryospheric Science. Cryospheric Science belongs to basic and applied basic science, and is also a new discipline of comprehensive natural science and social science. Perspective on Cryospheric Science At present, climate change, environmental change, earth system science and sustainable development, which, by their nature, must encompass the terms \u2018comprehensive\u2019 and \u2018system\u2019, have become foci of concern and hot spots of the international research community. These issues differ from important issues of the past primarily in their greater concern with the sustainable development of human society. They have deep connections with each other\u2014although each has its own concerns, they all have many things in common.Future studies of global change will be more systematic and comprehensive and will address sustainable development. Within this context, Cryospheric Science should address the major science problems of today. They will be carried out in a systematic way, from determining cryosphere dynamic processes and the mechanism of the impact of cryospheric changes to adaptation to cryospheric changes. Moreover, this will be accomplished by combining natural and human processes to develop in-depth awareness of cryosphere natural processes, and seeking adaptive science countermeasures for sustainable development.The frontiers of Cryospheric Science are summarized in Fig. 5, including: Deepen the understanding of the mechanisms of the cryosphere itself, at different spatial and temporal scales, including dynamic, water and energy processes and response to change, to more accurately forecast potential changes in cryosphere elements and provide a reliable basis for understanding the impact of cryospheric change. Improved modeling capacity is needed for the cryosphere as part of the weather/climate system in studies on interactions between the cryosphere and atmosphere, including how the cryosphere affects weather/climate systems at global, regional and local scales and at various time scales. Accessing these effects will require a quantitative and detailed description of the cryosphere elements in the weather/climate system.Understand the impact of the cryosphere on the global water cycle and on regional water resources, including more attention on how the cryosphere influences sea-level changes and global ocean circulation; and how cryospheric changes impact hydrological processes and catchment scale sustainable water resource utilization. This requires deepening our understanding of levels of the cryosphere in the global water-cycle process and the impact of cryospheric changes on the utilization of water resources in a catchment.Reveal the interaction between the cryosphere and biosphere and carbon cycle, including not only impacts of cryospheric change on terrestrial ecosystems, but also impacts on marine ecosystems. Exchange of greenhouse gases between cryosphere elements, especially permafrost, should be the next focus of attention. The threshold of the impact of cryospheric changes on ecosystems at various spatial and temporal scales and the quantitative assessment of greenhouse gas emissions in permafrost are limited by relatively lacking basic research of Cryospheric Science. To improve our knowledge of the way in which the cryosphere and biosphere interact, we need to reveal the relationships between the cryosphere and the biosphere and clarify the permafrost carbon cycle.Quantify the integration effect of earth surface processes on basins and improve our ability to predict disasters. In the interactions between the cryosphere and the lithosphere, the role of cryosphere elements in the land surface is described in physical, chemical, biological and other terms. Along with hazards, including glacier lake outburst floods, freeze\u2013thaw destruction, snowmelt floods, landslide and debris flow increases, cryospheric change strengthens cryosphere-related land surface processes. Future research on the interaction between the cryosphere and the lithosphere should include: (i) developing more accurate warnings and predictions capacity of risk of these hazards; (ii) enhanced sediment-handling capacity under accelerated freeze\u2013thaw erosion, increased thermal thawing of lakes and pools, and increased glacier meltwater and biological processes that result from changes in land surface water and energy\u2014these changes in surface process will lead to changes in physical, biological and geochemical processes. Quantifying and evaluating the impacts of these changes downstream in basin will be a future focus of study.Explore potential approaches to adapting to risks. The focus of interaction between the cryosphere and anthroposphere is how to deal with the impact of changes in the cryosphere, or how human society can adapt to the disadvantages resulting from cryospheric change. A big concern is how large of a negative impact cryospheric changes will have on human society. This scientific issue involves risk assessment: we need to quantify the risk of adverse effects of cryospheric changes on human society in different fields of activity or different industrial areas. Therefore, we need to identify the different effects of different elements of the cryosphere, construct a system and methods of risk evaluation, and explore ways of dealing with these risks. Meanwhile, cryospheric changes benefit human society at certain spatial and temporal scales. The cryosphere itself provides many benefits and has values. Future search priorities include a comprehensive analysis to understand and evaluate the services and values of the cryosphere, conduct quantitative analysis of the risks from cryospheric change and explore ways to adapt to the impacts of that change [87]. Figure 5.View largeDownload slideSchematic map of the frontiers of Cryospheric Science.Figure 5.View largeDownload slideSchematic map of the frontiers of Cryospheric Science. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank two anonymous reviewers for valuable comments and suggestions that significantly improved this manuscript. This work is supported by the Global Change Research Program of China (2013CBA01808) and the China National Natural Science Foundation (41421061 and L1524012). REFERENCES 1.Ding YJ, Xiao CD. Challenges in the study of cryospheric changes and their impacts [in Chinese with English abstract]. Adv Earth Sci\u00a0 2013; 28: 1067\u201376.2.ACIA. Arctic Climate Impact Assessment\u00a0. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.3.Olav S, Richard K. The Cryosphere and Global Environmental Change\u00a0. Blackwell Publishing, 2007.4.CliC. http://clic.npopar.no/, 2012.5.French HM, Slaymaker O. Changing Cold Environments: A Canadian Perspective\u00a0. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, 2011.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a06.Paepe R. Cyclic evolution of man and permafrost: the role of permafrost on societal environment. In: Paepe R, Melnikov V (eds). Permafrost Response on Economic Development, Environmental Security and Natural Resources\u00a0. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer, 2001, 3\u201313.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a07.UNEP. Global Outlook for Ice and Snow\u00a0. UNEP JobNo: DEW/0924/NA. 2007.8.UNEP. Policy Implications of Warming Permafrost\u00a0. UNEP JobNumber: DEW/1621/NA. 20129.Callaghan TV, Johansson M, Key J et al.\u00a0 Feedbacks and interactions: from the arctic cryosphere to the climate system. AMBIO\u00a0 2011; 40: 75\u201386.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a010.AMAP. Snow, Water, Ice and Permafrost in the Arctic (SWIPA): Climate Change and the Cryosphere\u00a0. Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP), Oslo, Norway, 2012.11.Levermann A, Bamber JL, Drijfhout S et al.\u00a0 Potential climatic transitions with profound impact on Europe. Climatic Change\u00a0 2012; 110: 845\u201378.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a012.Ding YJ, Mu M, Lin ED. Climate and environment change: 2012: Impact and vulnerability [in Chinese]. In: Qin DH, Ding YJ, Mu M (eds). Climate and Environment Change: 2012\u00a0, Beijing: Meteorology Press, 2012.13.Vaughan DG, Comiso JC, Allison I. Observations: cryosphere. In: Stocker TF, Qin D, Plattner GK (eds). Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis\u00a0. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013.14.Church JA, Clark PU, Cazenave A. Sea level change. In: Stocker TF, Qin D, Plattner GK (eds). Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis\u00a0. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013, 1137\u2013206.15.Field CB, Barros VR, Mach KJ Technical summary. In: Field CB, Barros VR, Dokken DJ (eds). Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects\u00a0. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014. 35\u201394.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a016.Reid WV, Brechignac C, Tseh Lee Y. Earth system research priorities. Science\u00a0 2009; 325: 245.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS PubMed\u00a017.Reid WV, Chen D, Goldfarb L et al.\u00a0 Earth system science for global sustainability: grand challenges. Science\u00a0 2010; 330: 916\u201317.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS PubMed\u00a018.Bitz CM, Marshall SJ. Cryosphere, modeling of. In: Robert AM (ed.). Encyclopedia of Sustainability Science and Technology\u00a0. New York: Springer, 2012, 2761\u201380.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a019.Roger GB. Cryosphere models. In: Robert AM (ed.). Encyclopedia of Complexity and Systems Science\u00a0. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer, 2014.20.Steffen K, Yang DQ, Ryabinin V. ACSYS: a scientific foundation for the climate and cryosphere (CliC) project. In: Lemke P, Jacobi HW (eds). Arctic Climate Change: The ACSYS Decade and Beyond\u00a0. Atmospheric and Oceanographic Sciences Library 43. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer, 2012, 437\u201359.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a021.Arndt N. Cryosphere. In: Muriel G, Ricardo A, Henderson JC (eds). Encyclopedia of Astrobiology\u00a0. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer, 2011, 391.22.Huybrechts P. Cryosphere. In: Encyclopedia of Paleoclimatology and Ancient Environments, Encyclopedia of Earth Sciences Series\u00a0, Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer, 2009. 221\u20136.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a023.Wang G, Ding YJ, Wang J. Land ecological changes and evolutional patterns in the source regions of the Yangtze and Yellow River in recent 15 years. Acta Geogr Sinica\u00a0 2004; 59: 163\u201373.24.Wang G, Li Y, Wu Q et al. Impacts of permafrost changes on alpine ecosystem in Qinghai-Tibet Plateau. Sci China Ser D\u00a0 2006; 49: 1156\u201369.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a025.Tape K, Sturm M, Racine C. The evidence for shrub expansion in Northern Alaska and the Pan-Arctic. Global Change Biol\u00a0 2006; 12: 686\u2013702.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a026.Kaplan JO, New M. Arctic climate change with a 2 ?C global warming: timing, climate patterns and vegetation change. Climatic Change\u00a0 2006; 79: 213\u201341.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a027.Lenoir J, Gegout JC, Marquet PA et al.\u00a0 A significant upward shift in plant species optimum elevation during the 20th century. Science\u00a0 2008; 320: 1768\u201371.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS PubMed\u00a028.Piao S, Fang J, Ciais P et al.\u00a0 The carbon balance of terrestrial ecosystems in China. Nature\u00a0 2009; 458: 1009\u201313.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS PubMed\u00a029.Vieira G, Bockheim J, Guglielmin M et al.\u00a0 Thermal state of permafrost and active-layer monitoring in the antarctic: advances during the international polar year 2007\u20132009. Permafrost Periglac Process\u00a0 2010; 21: 182\u201397.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a030.Johansson M, Kerman J, Keuper F et al.\u00a0 Past and present permafrost temperatures in the Abisko area: redrilling of boreholes. AMBIO\u00a0 2011; 40: 558\u201365.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS PubMed\u00a031.Wang G, Bai W, Li N et al.\u00a0 Climate changes and its impact on tundra ecosystem in Qinghai-Tibet Plateau, China. Climatic Change\u00a0 2011; 106: 463\u201382.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a032.Kreyling J, Haei M, Laudon H. Absence of snow cover reduces understory plant cover and alters plant community composition in boreal forests. Oecologia\u00a0 2012; 168: 577\u201387.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS PubMed\u00a033.Beniston M, Stoffel M. Assessing the impacts of climatic change on mountain water resources. Sci Total Environ\u00a0 2014; 493: 1129\u201337.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS PubMed\u00a034.Hijioka Y, Lin E, Pereira JJ. Asia. In: Field CB, Barros VR, Dokken DJ (eds). Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects\u00a0. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014, 1858\u2013925.35.Larsen JN, Anisimov OA, Constable A. Polar regions. In: Field CB, Barros VR, Dokken DJ (eds). Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects\u00a0. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014, 1567\u2013612.36.Radic V, Hock R. Glaciers in the earth's hydrological cycle: assessments of glacier mass and runoff changes on global and regional scales. Surv Geophys\u00a0 2014; 35: 813\u201337.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a037.O\u2019Neel S, Hood E, Arendt A et al.\u00a0 Assessing streamflow sensitivity to variations in glacier mass balance. Climatic Change\u00a0 2014; 123: 329\u201341.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a038.Beck I, Ludwig R, Bernier M et al.\u00a0 Assessing permafrost degradation and land cover changes (1986\u20132009) using remote sensing data over umiujaq, sub-arctic qu\u00e9bec. Permafrost Periglac Process\u00a0 2015; 26: 129\u201341.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a039.Loarie SR, Duffy PB, Hamilton H et al.\u00a0 The velocity of climate change. Nature\u00a0 2009; 462: 1052\u20135.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS PubMed\u00a040.IPCC. Summary for policy makers. In: Field CB, Barros VR, Dokken DJ (eds). Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects\u00a0. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014.41.Zimov SA, Schuur EAG, Chapin FS. CLIMATE CHANGE: permafrost and the global carbon budget. Science\u00a0 2006; 312: 1612\u201313.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS PubMed\u00a042.Ping C, Michaelson GJ, Jorgenson MT et al.\u00a0 High stocks of soil organic carbon in the North American Arctic region. Nature Geosci\u00a0 2008; 1: 615\u201319.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a043.Van Huissteden J, Dolman A. Soil carbon in the Arctic and the permafrost carbon feedback. Curr Opin Environ Sustainability\u00a0 2012; 4: 545\u201351.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a044.Jaeger JM, Koppes MN. The role of the cryosphere in source-to-sink systems. Earth-Sci Rev\u00a0 2016; 153: 43\u201376.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a045.Zollinger B, Alewell C, Kneisel C et al.\u00a0 Effect of permafrost on the formation of soil organic carbon pools and their physical-chemical properties in the Eastern Swiss Alps. CATENA\u00a0 2013; 110: 70\u201385.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a046.Miyazaki S, Ishikawa M, Baatarbileg N et al.\u00a0 Interannual and seasonal variations in energy and carbon exchanges over the larch forests on the permafrost in northeastern Mongolia. Polar Sci\u00a0 2014; 8: 166\u201382.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a047.Routh J, Hugelius G, Kuhry P et al.\u00a0 Multi-proxy study of soil organic matter dynamics in permafrost peat deposits reveal vulnerability to climate change in the European Russian Arctic. Chem Geol\u00a0 2014; 368: 104\u201317.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a048.Song C, Wang X, Miao Y et al.\u00a0 Effects of permafrost thaw on carbon emissions under aerobic and anaerobic environments in the Great Hing\u2019an Mountains, China. Sci Total Environ\u00a0 2014; 487: 604\u201310.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS PubMed\u00a049.Guo YD, Song CC, Wan ZM et al.\u00a0 Dynamics of dissolved organic carbon release from a permafrost wetland catchment in northeast China. J Hydrol\u00a0 2015; 531: 919\u201328.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a050.Kim Y. Effect of thaw depth on fluxes of CO2 and CH4 in manipulated Arctic coastal tundra of Barrow, Alaska. Sci Total Environ\u00a0 2015; 505: 385\u20139.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS PubMed\u00a051.Mu C, Zhang T, Zhang X et al.\u00a0 Pedogenesis and physicochemical parameters influencing soil carbon and nitrogen of alpine meadows in permafrost regions in the northeastern Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau. CATENA\u00a0 2016; 141: 85\u201391.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a052.Siewert MB, Hugelius G, Heim B et al.\u00a0 Landscape controls and vertical variability of soil organic carbon storage in permafrost-affected soils of the Lena River Delta. CATENA\u00a0 2016; 147: 725\u201341.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a053.Sj\u00f6gersten S, Caul S, Daniell TJ et al.\u00a0 Organic matter chemistry controls greenhouse gas emissions from permafrost peatlands. Soil Biol Biochem\u00a0 2016; 98: 42\u201353.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a054.Weiss N, Blok D, Elberling B et al. Thermokarst dynamics and soil organic matter characteristics controlling initial carbon release from permafrost soils in the Siberian Yedoma region. Sediment Geol\u00a0 2016; 340: 38\u201348.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a055.Tarnocai C, Canadell JG, Schuur EAG et al.\u00a0 Soil organic carbon pools in the northern circumpolar permafrost region. Global Biogeochem Cycles\u00a0 2009; 23: n/a.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a056.Webster KL, Mclaughlin JW. Application of a Bayesian belief network for assessing the vulnerability of permafrost to thaw and implications for greenhouse gas production and climate feedback. Environ Sci Pol\u00a0 2014; 38: 28\u201344.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a057.Immerzeel WW, Van Beek LPH, Bierkens MFP. Climate change will affect the Asian water towers. Science\u00a0 2010; 328: 1382\u20135.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS PubMed\u00a058.Carey M, Baraer M, Mark BG et al.\u00a0 Toward hydro-social modeling: merging human variables and the social sciences with climate-glacier runoff models (Santa River, Peru). J Hydrol\u00a0 2014; 518: 60\u201370.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a059.Bayard D, St\u00e4hli M, Parriaux A et al.\u00a0 The influence of seasonally frozen soil on the snowmelt runoff at two Alpine sites in southern Switzerland. J Hydrol\u00a0 2005; 309: 66\u201384.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a060.Ye B, Yang D, Zhang Z et al.\u00a0 Variation of hydrological regime with permafrost coverage over Lena Basin in Siberia. J Geophys Res\u00a0 2009; 114: D07102.61.Li P, Zhang Z, Liu J. Dominant climate factors influencing the Arctic runoff and association between the Arctic runoff and sea ice. Acta Oceanol Sin\u00a0 2010; 29: 10\u201320.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a062.Ding YJ, Liu SY, Liu FJ. Advancement of cold region hydrology studies over last the two decades in China [in Chinese with English abstract]. J Glaciol Geocryol\u00a0 2012; 34: 1009\u201322.63.Kalyuzhnyi IL, Lavrov SA. Basic physical processes and regularities of winter and spring river runoff formation under climate warming conditions. Russ Meteorol Hydrol\u00a0 2012; 37: 47\u201356.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a064.Quinton WL, Baltzer JL. The active-layer hydrology of a peat plateau with thawing permafrost (Scotty Creek, Canada). Hydrogeol J\u00a0 2013; 21: 201\u201320.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a065.Woo M, Marsh P. Snow, frozen soils and permafrost hydrology in Canada, 1999-2002. Hydrol Process\u00a0 2005; 19: 215\u201329.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a066.Alexander IS, Theodore JB, Dennis PL. Interactions between land cover/use change and hydrology. In: Gutman G, Reissell A (eds). Eurasian Arctic Land Cover and Land Use in a Changing Climate\u00a0. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer, 2011, 137\u201375.67.Dennis PL, Su FG. Progress in hydrological modeling over high latitudes: Under arctic climate system study (ACSYS). In: Lemke P, Jacobi HW (eds). Arctic Climate Change: The ACSYS Decade and Beyond\u00a0. Atmospheric and Oceanographic Sciences Library, Vol. 43. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer, 2012, 357\u201380.68.Ding Y, Zhang S. The hydrological impact of cryosphere water cycle on global-scale water cycle. Chinese Sci Bull (Chinese Ver)\u00a0 2015; 60: 1\u201310.69.Balk B, Elder K. Combining binary decision tree and geostatistical methods to estimate snow distribution in a mountain watershed. Water Resour Res\u00a0 2000; 36: 13\u201326.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a070.Valeo C, Ho C. Modelling urban snowmelt runoff. J Hydrol\u00a0 2004; 299: 237\u201351.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a071.Martin E, Etchevers P. Impact of climatic changes on snow cover and snow hydrology in the French Alps. In: Huber UM, Bugmann HKM, Reasoner MA (eds). Global Change and Mountain Regions\u00a0. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer, 2005; 235\u201342.72.Jost G, Dan Moore R, Weiler M et al.\u00a0 Use of distributed snow measurements to test and improve a snowmelt model for predicting the effect of forest clear-cutting. J Hydrol\u00a0 2009; 376: 94\u2013106.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a073.Iwata Y, Nemoto M, Hasegawa S et al.\u00a0 Influence of rain, air temperature, and snow cover on subsequent spring-snowmelt infiltration into thin frozen soil layer in northern Japan. J Hydrol\u00a0 2011; 401: 165\u201376.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a074.Vicu\u00f1a S, Garreaud RD, Mcphee J. Climate change impacts on the hydrology of a snowmelt driven basin in semiarid Chile. Climatic Change\u00a0 2011; 105: 469\u201388.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a075.Bavay M, Gr\u00fcnewald T, Lehning M. Response of snow cover and runoff to climate change in high Alpine catchments of Eastern Switzerland. Adv Water Resour\u00a0 2013; 55: 4\u201316.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a076.Li HY, Wang J. Key research topics and their advances on modeling snow hydrological processes [in Chinese with English abstract]. J Glaciol Geocryol\u00a0 2013; 35: 430\u20137.77.Khadka D, Babel MS, Shrestha S et al.\u00a0 Climate change impact on glacier and snow melt and runoff in Tamakoshi basin in the Hindu Kush Himalayan (HKH) region. J Hydrol\u00a0 2014; 511: 49\u201360.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a078.Romero-Lankao P, Smith JB, Davidson DJ. North America. In: Field CB, Barros VR, Dokken DJ (eds). Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part B: Regional Aspects\u00a0. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014, 1439\u201398.79.Wang X, Liu S, Ding Y et al.\u00a0 An approach for estimating the breach probabilities of moraine-dammed lakes in the Chinese Himalayas using remote-sensing data. Nat Hazards Earth Syst Sci\u00a0 2012; 12: 3109\u201322.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a080.Wang X, Ding Y, Liu S et al.\u00a0 Changes of glacial lakes and implications in Tian Shan, central Asia, based on remote sensing data from 1990 to 2010. Environ Res Lett\u00a0 2013; 8: 044052.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a081.Nussbaumer S, Schaub Y, Huggel C et al.\u00a0 Risk estimation for future glacier lake outburst floods based on local land-use changes. Nat Hazards Earth Syst Sci\u00a0 2014; 14: 1611\u201324.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a082.Haemmig C, Huss M, Keusen H et al.\u00a0 Hazard assessment of glacial lake outburst floods from Kyagar glacier, Karakoram mountains, China. Ann Glaciol\u00a0 2014; 55: 34\u201344.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a083.Haeberli W, Schaub Y, Huggel C. Increasing risks related to landslides from degrading permafrost into new lakes in de-glaciating mountain ranges. Geomorphology\u00a0 2016; doi: 10.1016/j.geomorph.2016.02.009.84.Deline P, Gardent M, Magnin F et al.\u00a0 The morphodynamics of the Mont Blanc mass if in a changing cryosphere: a comprehensive review. Geogr Ann A\u00a0 2012; 94: 265\u201383.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a085.Knight J, Harrison S. Mountain glacial and paraglacial environments under global climate change: lessons from the past, future directions and policy implications. Geogr Ann A\u00a0 2014; 96: 245\u201364.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a086.Mergili M, Kopf C, M\u00fcllebner B et al.\u00a0 Changes of the cryosphere and related geohazards in the high-mountain areas of Tajikistan and Austria: a comparison. Geogr Ann A\u00a0 2012; 93: 79\u201396.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a087.Xiao C, Wang S, Qin D. A preliminary study of cryosphere service function and value evaluation. Adv Climate Change Res\u00a0 2015; 6: 181\u20137.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a088.Wang SJ. Glaciers Tourism Resources Spatial Development and Planning in China\u00a0 [in Chinese with English abstract]. Beijing: Science Press, 2016.89.Falk M, Hagsten E. Importance of early snowfall for Swedish ski resorts: evidence based on monthly data. Tourism Manage\u00a0 2016; 53: 61\u201373.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a090.Gagn\u00e9 K, Rasmussen MB, Orlove B. Glaciers and society: attributions, perceptions, and valuations. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews Climate Change 2014; 5: 793\u2013808.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a091.Costanza R, De Groot R, Sutton P et al.\u00a0 Changes in the global value of ecosystem services. Global Environ Chang\u00a0 2014; 26: 152\u20138.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a092.Deng M, Qin D, Zhang H. Public perceptions of climate and cryosphere change in typical arid inland river areas of China: facts, impacts and selections of adaptation measures. Quatern Int\u00a0 2012; 282: 48\u201357.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a093.Yang JP, Ding YJ, Fang YP. Research frame of vulnerability and adaptation for the Cryosphere and its changes [in Chinese with English abstract]. Adv Earth Sci\u00a0 2015; 30: 517\u201329.94.Yang JP, Zhang TJ. An overview of cryospheric vulnerability and its assessment methods in China [in Chinese with English abstract]. J Glaciol Geocryol\u00a0 2010; 32: 1085\u201396.95.Fang Y, Qin D, Ding Y. Frozen soil change and adaptation of animal husbandry: a case of the source regions of Yangtze and Yellow Rivers. Environ Sci Policy\u00a0 2011;14: 555\u201368.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a096.He Y, Wu Y, Liu Q. Vulnerability assessment of areas affected by Chinese cryospheric changes in future climate change scenarios. Chin Sci Bull\u00a0 2012; 57: 4784\u201390.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a097.Yang SQ, Yang JP, Wang SJ. Adaptive capacity evaluation of ecological-economic system to cryospheric change: a case study in the Mount Yulong [in Chinese with English abstract]. J Glaciol Geocryol\u00a0 2012; 34: 485\u201393.98.Woo MK. Permafrost Hydrology\u00a0. Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer, 2012.Google ScholarCrossrefSearch ADS \u00a9 The Author(s) 2017. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of China Science Publishing & Media Ltd. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com Issue Section: GEOSCIENCES Download all figures 1,005 Views 3 Citations View Metrics \u00d7 Email alerts New issue alert Advance article alerts Article activity alert Receive exclusive offers and updates from Oxford Academic Close Related articles in Web of Science Google Scholar Citing articles via Web of Science (3) Google Scholar CrossRef Latest Most Read Most Cited Chinese science education in schools and beyond Linking Atmospheric Pollution to Cryospheric Change in the Third Pole Region: Current Progresses and Future Prospects The revival of thermal utilization from the sun: interfacial solar vapor generation A Perspective on Gaussian Processes for Earth Observation SLIPS-TENG: robust triboelectric nanogenerator with optical and charge transparency using slippery interface About National Science Review Editorial Board Policies Author Guidelines Facebook Twitter Purchase Recommend to your Library Advertising and Corporate Services Journals Career Network Online ISSN 2053-714X Print ISSN 2095-5138 Copyright \u00a9 2019 China Science Publishing & Media Ltd. (Science Press) About Us Contact Us Careers Help Access & Purchase Rights & Permissions Open Access Connect Join Our Mailing List OUPblog Twitter Facebook YouTube Tumblr Resources Authors Librarians Societies Sponsors & Advertisers Press & Media Agents Explore Shop OUP Academic Oxford Dictionaries Oxford Index Epigeum OUP Worldwide University of Oxford Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education by publishing worldwide Copyright \u00a9 2019 Oxford University Press Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Legal Notice Site Map Accessibility Get Adobe Reader Close This Feature Is Available To Subscribers Only Sign In or Create an Account Close This PDF is available to Subscribers Only View Article Abstract & Purchase Options For full access to this pdf, sign in to an existing account, or purchase an annual subscription. Close", "Luke Copland (@Cryospheric) | Twitter We've detected that JavaScript is disabled in your browser. Would you like to proceed to legacy Twitter? Yes Skip to content Home Home Home, current page. Moments Moments Moments, current page. Search query Search Twitter Saved searches Remove In this conversation Verified accountProtected Tweets\u00a0@ Suggested users Verified accountProtected Tweets\u00a0@ Verified accountProtected Tweets\u00a0@ Language: English Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Catal\u00e0 \u010ce\u0161tina Dansk Deutsch English UK Espa\u00f1ol Filipino Fran\u00e7ais Hrvatski Italiano Magyar Nederlands Norsk Polski Portugu\u00eas Rom\u00e2n\u0103 Sloven\u010dina Suomi Svenska Ti\u1ebfng Vi\u1ec7t T\u00fcrk\u00e7e \u0395\u03bb\u03bb\u03b7\u03bd\u03b9\u03ba\u03ac \u0411\u044a\u043b\u0433\u0430\u0440\u0441\u043a\u0438 \u0435\u0437\u0438\u043a \u0420\u0443\u0441\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439 \u0421\u0440\u043f\u0441\u043a\u0438 \u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0441\u044c\u043a\u0430 \u043c\u043e\u0432\u0430 \u05e2\u05b4\u05d1\u05b0\u05e8\u05b4\u05d9\u05ea \u0627\u0644\u0639\u0631\u0628\u064a\u0629 \u0641\u0627\u0631\u0633\u06cc \u092e\u0930\u093e\u0920\u0940 \u0939\u093f\u0928\u094d\u0926\u0940 \u09ac\u09be\u0982\u09b2\u09be \u0a97\u0ac1\u0a9c\u0ab0\u0abe\u0aa4\u0ac0 \u0ba4\u0bae\u0bbf\u0bb4\u0bcd \u0c95\u0ca8\u0ccd\u0ca8\u0ca1 \u0e20\u0e32\u0e29\u0e32\u0e44\u0e17\u0e22 \ud55c\uad6d\uc5b4 \u65e5\u672c\u8a9e \u7b80\u4f53\u4e2d\u6587 \u7e41\u9ad4\u4e2d\u6587 Have an account? Log in Have an account? Remember me \u00b7 Forgot password? New to Twitter? Sign up Luke Copland @Cryospheric Tweets Tweets, current page. 37 Following Following 62 Followers Followers 96 Likes Likes 83 More Likes Unmute @Cryospheric Mute @Cryospheric Follow Follow @Cryospheric Following Following @Cryospheric Unfollow Unfollow @Cryospheric Blocked Blocked @Cryospheric Unblock Unblock @Cryospheric Pending Pending follow request from @Cryospheric Cancel Cancel your follow request to @Cryospheric Luke Copland @Cryospheric Ottawa, Canada cryospheric.org Joined January 2014 2 Photos and videos Photos and videos Tweets Tweets Tweets, current page. Tweets & replies Media You blocked @Cryospheric Are you sure you want to view these Tweets? Viewing Tweets won't unblock @Cryospheric Yes, view profile Close Luke Copland followed Luke Copland\u200f\u00a0@Cryospheric Mar 7 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet Luke Copland Retweeted Abby Dalton Great work by lab member Abby Dalton!https://twitter.com/iceberg_abby/status/1103726293047304198\u00a0\u2026 Luke Copland added, Abby Dalton\u00a0@iceberg_abby As a @uOttawa PhD student, I use @InnovationCA funding to study icebergs in the Canadian Arctic from aboard the CCGS Amundsen @CoastGuardCAN, like this one near #Qikiqtarjuaq! #IAmInnovation #Contest @ArcticNet @ScienceMIN @ChiefSciCan @GGJuliePayette @wirlcarleton @uOttawaGEG pic.twitter.com/gD6k2tNkka Show this thread 0 replies 0 retweets 3 likes Reply Retweet Retweeted Like 3 Liked 3 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo Luke Copland Retweeted uOttawa GEG Dept.\u200f\u00a0@uOttawaGEG Feb 28 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet Dr. B. Wellar, Emeritus @uOttawaGEG , Member of the Order of Canada and Dr. L. Copland University Research Chair in Glaciology here in the company of President J. Fr\u00e9mont @recteurUOpres are recognized at the reception for Excellence in Research and Teaching @uOttawapic.twitter.com/GI9bISDbCy 0 replies 4 retweets 9 likes Reply Retweet 4 Retweeted 4 Like 9 Liked 9 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo Luke Copland Retweeted T-MOSAiC\u200f\u00a0@t_mosaic 11 Dec 2018 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet The 3rd T-MOSAiC workshop took place on December 10th during the ASM 2018 Conference in Ottawa, Canada. The workshop was focused on the Implementation Plan and several scientific topics were discussed in a Pan-Arctic implementation perspective. #TMOSAiCpic.twitter.com/anEBpsLy0O 1 reply 1 retweet 2 likes Reply 1 Retweet 1 Retweeted 1 Like 2 Liked 2 Show this thread Show this thread Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo Luke Copland\u200f\u00a0@Cryospheric 13 Dec 2018 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet Luke Copland Retweeted Cryo Connect Great to see our paper at #1! @WaterSHEDLabhttps://twitter.com/CryoConnect/status/1072165038725718016\u00a0\u2026 Luke Copland added, Cryo Connect\u00a0@CryoConnect Which #cryosphere #science studies received most #media attention? See the top 50 for 2017 here! https://cryoconnect.net/news/top-50-of-cryosphere-papers-in-the-media-2017/\u00a0\u2026 @altmetric @nature @theAGU @NatureClimate @ScienceAdvances @PNASNews @sciencemagazine @igsoc @NatureGeosci pic.twitter.com/sx83Ar3jot 0 replies 0 retweets 4 likes Reply Retweet Retweeted Like 4 Liked 4 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo Luke Copland\u200f\u00a0@Cryospheric 4 Sep 2018 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet Luke Copland Retweeted WIRL Great that lab members Abby and Claire could be of service!https://twitter.com/wirlcarleton/status/1037013719602130945\u00a0\u2026 Luke Copland added, WIRL\u00a0@wirlcarleton Thanks to @GGJuliePayette @ArcticNet and @Cryospheric for help recovering our station on PIIA-1-f! https://wirl.carleton.ca/gg_piia-1-f/\u00a0 pic.twitter.com/XLBq6tA436 0 replies 0 retweets 5 likes Reply Retweet Retweeted Like 5 Liked 5 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo Luke Copland\u200f\u00a0@Cryospheric 16 Jul 2018 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet Great new work by lab members on Canadian Arctic glacier changes http://nunatsiaq.com/stories/article/65674with_warming_temperatures_canadas_arctic_glaciers_are_melting_faster/\u00a0\u2026 0 replies 0 retweets 4 likes Reply Retweet Retweeted Like 4 Liked 4 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo Luke Copland\u200f\u00a0@Cryospheric 14 Jun 2018 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet Luke Copland Retweeted PolarKnowledgeCanada Thanks Polar Knowledge Canada - we appreciate the funding!https://twitter.com/POLARCanada/status/1007356463231242245\u00a0\u2026 Luke Copland added, PolarKnowledgeCanadaVerified account\u00a0@POLARCanada We\u2019re proud to announce 384 students conducting #northernresearch will receive $916 000 in funding through POLAR\u2019s 2018-2019 Northern Scientific Training Program. #polarknowledge #Arctic #GoC @Min_CIRNA http://ow.ly/tiag30kvmGp 0 replies 2 retweets 8 likes Reply Retweet 2 Retweeted 2 Like 8 Liked 8 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo Luke Copland Retweeted Ellyn Enderlin\u200f\u00a0@glacier_doc 21 May 2018 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet Spread the word! I'm looking for a new Masters student interested in #glaciology & remote sensing (start Fall 2018 or later if necessary). The @NASA-funded project aims to automatically map glacier change w/ @NASA_Landsat images & quantify #Greenland peripheral #glacier dynamicspic.twitter.com/E4hK6zVQzb 1 reply 22 retweets 23 likes Reply 1 Retweet 22 Retweeted 22 Like 23 Liked 23 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo Luke Copland\u200f\u00a0@Cryospheric 19 Apr 2018 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet Paper PDF: https://lcresearch.files.wordpress.com/2018/04/vanwychen-et-al-2018-western-canada-velocities-cjrs.pdf\u00a0\u2026 0 replies 0 retweets 2 likes Reply Retweet Retweeted Like 2 Liked 2 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo Luke Copland\u200f\u00a0@Cryospheric 19 Apr 2018 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet Check out our new paper on the velocity of all glaciers in western Canada: Van Wychen, W., Copland, L., Jiskoot, H., Gray, L., Sharp, M., Burgess, D. 2018. Surface velocities of glaciers in western Canada from speckle-tracking of ALOS PALSAR and RADARSAT-2 data. CJRS, 44, 57-66pic.twitter.com/3n5kxiS34u 0 replies 2 retweets 17 likes Reply Retweet 2 Retweeted 2 Like 17 Liked 17 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo Luke Copland Retweeted Nunatsiaq News\u200f\u00a0@NunatsiaqNews 12 Mar 2018 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet Shipping traffic swells in Canadian #Arctic as sea ice shrinks http://bit.ly/2FLejVW\u00a0pic.twitter.com/lmjoxpK4Bi 0 replies 5 retweets 3 likes Reply Retweet 5 Retweeted 5 Like 3 Liked 3 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo Luke Copland Retweeted Jackie Dawson\u200f\u00a0@jackie_dawson 27 Feb 2018 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet Curious about shipping trends in Arctic Canada? Check out our recent article. #justfacts #Arctic #shipping @espg_uottawa @uOttawaResearch @Cryospheric @MEOPAR_NCE @IrvingShipbuild @ArcticSynthesis http://arctic.journalhosting.ucalgary.ca/arctic/index.php/arctic/article/view/4698/4900\u00a0\u2026pic.twitter.com/0VWJnbUPHG 0 replies 17 retweets 25 likes Reply Retweet 17 Retweeted 17 Like 25 Liked 25 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo Luke Copland Retweeted Int. Glaciol. Soc.\u200f\u00a0@igsoc 23 Feb 2018 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet The IGS is pleased to announce that the following article has just been published @CambridgeCore and is available under First View at http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/aog.2017.46\u00a0\u2026 \"Changing contribution of peak velocity event.... White Glacier\" @LauraIThomson @Cryospheric @sfu 0 replies 1 retweet 1 like Reply Retweet 1 Retweeted 1 Like 1 Liked 1 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo Luke Copland Retweeted Dan Shugar\u200f\u00a0@WaterSHEDLab 17 Apr 2017 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet Avast! Check out my new paper in @NatureGeosci about river piracy and climate change http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/ngeo2932\u00a0\u2026 with @KHwave @Cryospheric Arrr! 5 replies 17 retweets 34 likes Reply 5 Retweet 17 Retweeted 17 Like 34 Liked 34 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo Luke Copland Retweeted Anna Crawford\u200f\u00a0@crawfisha 14 Jan 2017 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet Excellent piece on science and observed changes @ the Petermann Glacier, source of #iceislands in E. Can. Arctic http://tinyurl.com/jv3g5dg 0 replies 1 retweet 2 likes Reply Retweet 1 Retweeted 1 Like 2 Liked 2 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo Luke Copland\u200f\u00a0@Cryospheric 12 Dec 2016 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet New GRL paper: The influence of declining sea ice on shipping activity in the Canadian Arctic. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/2016GL071489/full\u00a0\u2026 0 replies 0 retweets 1 like Reply Retweet Retweeted Like 1 Liked 1 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo Luke Copland Retweeted NERC Arctic Office\u200f\u00a0@Arctic_Office 9 Dec 2016 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet Ambitious plans for research in the Canadian Arctic from @POLARCanada. Huge potential with UK-based researchers and @UKinCanada #ArcticNetpic.twitter.com/NkwBPSEFab 0 replies 10 retweets 9 likes Reply Retweet 10 Retweeted 10 Like 9 Liked 9 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo Luke Copland Retweeted Anna Crawford\u200f\u00a0@crawfisha 22 Sep 2016 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet The 12 sq km #iceisland from space! Thanks @NASAEarthDatapic.twitter.com/QS80zagsxi 0 replies 2 retweets 10 likes Reply Retweet 2 Retweeted 2 Like 10 Liked 10 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo Luke Copland\u200f\u00a0@Cryospheric 1 Jun 2016 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet Congrats to Laura Thomson for being runner-up in the 2016 ESRI Young Scholar competition for her White Glacier map http://esri.ca/en/blog/congratulations-canadas-2016-esri-young-scholar-award-winner-and-honourable-mentions\u00a0\u2026 0 replies 0 retweets 4 likes Reply Retweet Retweeted Like 4 Liked 4 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo Luke Copland\u200f\u00a0@Cryospheric 27 May 2016 More Copy link to Tweet Embed Tweet Luke Copland Retweeted Anna Crawford Looking forward to visiting Anna's ice island in Julyhttps://twitter.com/crawfisha/status/735644548525924352\u00a0\u2026 Luke Copland added, Anna Crawford\u00a0@crawfisha A little late, but it's up! https://crawfish22.wordpress.com/ 0 replies 0 retweets 1 like Reply Retweet Retweeted Like 1 Liked 1 Thanks. Twitter will use this to make your timeline better. Undo Undo @Cryospheric hasn't Tweeted yet. Back to top \u2191 Loading seems to be taking a while. Twitter may be over capacity or experiencing a momentary hiccup. Try again or visit Twitter Status for more information. New to Twitter? Sign up now to get your own personalized timeline! Sign up You may also like \u00b7 Refresh false \u00a9 2019 Twitter About Help Center Terms Privacy policy Cookies Ads info Close Choose a trend location Dismiss Close Previous Next Close Go to a person's profile Saved searches Remove In this conversation Verified accountProtected Tweets\u00a0@ Suggested users Verified accountProtected Tweets\u00a0@ Verified accountProtected Tweets\u00a0@ Close Promote this Tweet Close Block Cancel Block Tweet with a location You can add location information to your Tweets, such as your city or precise location, from the web and via third-party applications. You always have the option to delete your Tweet location history. Learn more Turn on Not now Close Your lists Close Create a new list List name Description Under 100 characters, optional Privacy Public \u00b7 Anyone can follow this list Private \u00b7 Only you can access this list Save list Close Close Copy link to Tweet Here's the URL for this Tweet. Copy it to easily share with friends. Close Embed this Tweet Embed this Video Add this Tweet to your website by copying the code below. Learn more Add this video to your website by copying the code below. Learn more Hmm, there was a problem reaching the server. Try again? Include parent Tweet Include media By embedding Twitter content in your website or app, you are agreeing to the Twitter Developer Agreement and Developer Policy. Preview Close Why you're seeing this ad Close Log in to Twitter Remember me \u00b7 Forgot password? Don't have an account? Sign up \u00bb Close Sign up for Twitter Not on Twitter? Sign up, tune into the things you care about, and get updates as they happen. Sign up Have an account? Log in \u00bb Close Two-way (sending and receiving) short codes: Country Code For customers of United States 40404 (any) Canada 21212 (any) United Kingdom 86444 Vodafone, Orange, 3, O2 Brazil 40404 Nextel, TIM Haiti 40404 Digicel, Voila Ireland 51210 Vodafone, O2 India 53000 Bharti Airtel, Videocon, Reliance Indonesia 89887 AXIS, 3, Telkomsel, Indosat, XL Axiata Italy 4880804 Wind 3424486444 Vodafone \u00bb See SMS short codes for other countries Close Confirmation Close Close Skip all Welcome home! This timeline is where you\u2019ll spend most of your time, getting instant updates about what matters to you. Tweets not working for you? Hover over the profile pic and click the Following button to unfollow any account. Say a lot with a little When you see a Tweet you love, tap the heart \u2014 it lets the person who wrote it know you shared the love. Spread the word The fastest way to share someone else\u2019s Tweet with your followers is with a Retweet. Tap the icon to send it instantly. Join the conversation Add your thoughts about any Tweet with a Reply. Find a topic you\u2019re passionate about, and jump right in. Learn the latest Get instant insight into what people are talking about now. Get more of what you love Follow more accounts to get instant updates about topics you care about. Find what's happening See the latest conversations about any topic instantly. Never miss a Moment Catch up instantly on the best stories happening as they unfold. Back Next Next Tweet from user", "Water and Carbon Cycles Flashcards | Quizlet SearchCreateLog inSign upLog inSign up 17 termselspoole11Water and Carbon CyclesSTUDYPLAYFlow/transferA form of linkage between one store/component and another that involves movement of energy or massInputThe addition of matter and/or energy into a systemStore/componentA part of the system where energy/mass is stored or transformedSystemA set of interrelated components working together towards some kind of processAtmospheric waterWater found in the atmosphere; mainly water vapour with some liquid water (cloud and rain droplets) and crystalsCryospheric waterThe water locked up on the Earths surface as iceHydrosphereA discontinuous layer of water at or near the Earths surface. It includes all liquid and frozen surface waters, groundwater held in soil and rock and atmospheric water vapourOceanic waterThe water contained in the Earths oceans and seas but not including such inland seas as the Caspian SeaTerrestrial waterThis consists of groundwater, soil moisture, lakes, wetlands and riversCondensationThe process by which water vapour changes to liquid waterCryospheric processesThose processes that affect the total mass of ice at any scale from local patches of frozen ground to global ice amounts. They include accumulation (the build up of ice mass) and ablation (the loss of ice mass)Drainage basinThis is an area of land drained by a river and its tributaries. It includes water found on the surface, in the soil and in near-surface geologyEvaporationThe process by which liquid water changes to gas. This requires energy, which is produced by the sun and aided by the windEvapotranspirationThe total output of water from the drainage basin directly back into the atmosphereGroundwater flowThe slow movement of water through underlying rocksInfiltrationThe downward movement of water from the surface into soilInterception storage...Water Cycle Terminology28 termsjaloneeAQA A Level Water and Carbon cycles50 termsPCraven73TEACHERWater Cycle Vocabulary33 termsDave_McNallyTEACHERA Level PE --> Contemporary issues in physical activity and sport19 termselspoole11A Level PE --> Sports psychology13 termselspoole11A Level PE --> Skill acquisition3 termselspoole11A level PE --> Biomechanics42 termselspoole11FeaturesQuizlet LiveQuizlet LearnDiagramsFlashcardsMobileHelpSign upHelp CenterHonor CodeCommunity GuidelinesStudentsTeachersAboutCompanyPressJobsAdvertisePrivacyTermsFollow usLanguageDeutschEnglish (UK)English (USA)Espa\u00f1olFran\u00e7ais (FR)Fran\u00e7ais (QC/CA)Bahasa IndonesiaItalianoNederlandspolskiPortugu\u00eas (BR)\u0420\u0443\u0441\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439T\u00fcrk\u00e7eTi\u1ebfng Vi\u1ec7t\ud55c\uad6d\uc5b4\u4e2d\u6587 (\u7b80\u4f53)\u4e2d\u6587 (\u7e41\u9ad4)\u65e5\u672c\u8a9e\u00a9 2019 Quizlet Inc.", "An Error Occurred Setting Your User Cookie An Error Occurred Setting Your User Cookie This site uses cookies to improve performance. If your browser does not accept cookies, you cannot view this site. Setting Your Browser to Accept Cookies There are many reasons why a cookie could not be set correctly. Below are the most common reasons: You have cookies disabled in your browser. You need to reset your browser to accept cookies or to ask you if you want to accept cookies. Your browser asks you whether you want to accept cookies and you declined. To accept cookies from this site, use the Back button and accept the cookie. Your browser does not support cookies. Try a different browser if you suspect this. The date on your computer is in the past. If your computer's clock shows a date before 1 Jan 1970, the browser will automatically forget the cookie. To fix this, set the correct time and date on your computer. You have installed an application that monitors or blocks cookies from being set. You must disable the application while logging in or check with your system administrator. Why Does this Site Require Cookies? This site uses cookies to improve performance by remembering that you are logged in when you go from page to page. To provide access without cookies would require the site to create a new session for every page you visit, which slows the system down to an unacceptable level. What Gets Stored in a Cookie? This site stores nothing other than an automatically generated session ID in the cookie; no other information is captured. In general, only the information that you provide, or the choices you make while visiting a web site, can be stored in a cookie. For example, the site cannot determine your email name unless you choose to type it. Allowing a website to create a cookie does not give that or any other site access to the rest of your computer, and only the site that created the cookie can read it.", "Thermokarst | geology | Britannica.com ENCYCLOP\u00c6DIA BRITANNICA START YOUR FREE TRIAL Log In \u00b7 Join Demystified Quizzes Galleries Lists On This Day Biographies Newsletters START YOUR FREE TRIAL Search Britannica What are you looking for? Search Click here to search Browse popular topics: Sugar Act Ash Wednesday Nullification crisis Liturgy of the Word K\u00f6ppen climate classification Bring fact-checked results to the top of your browser search. Learn More. Thermokarstgeology Written By: The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica See Article History Thermokarst, land-surface configuration that results from the melting of ground ice in a region underlain by permafrost. In areas that have appreciable amounts of ice, small pits, valleys, and hummocks are formed when the ice melts and the ground settles unevenly. The size and form of the features depends on the nature and extent of the ice. In general, regional thermokarst activity indicates an overall warming of the climate, whereas localized thermokarst forms may be caused by the movement of heavy vehicles or the construction of buildings over permafrost, the introduction of agriculture, or deforestation. Individual features have no characteristics that are exclusively due to thermokarst activity, and they are hard to distinguish from those formed by other means. Features resulting from the melting of dead glacial ice are not classified as thermokarst forms. This article was most recently revised and updated by John P. Rafferty, Editor. Learn More in these related Britannica articles: permafrost: Thermokarst formations The thawing of permafrost creates thermokarst topography, an uneven surface that contains mounds, sinkholes, tunnels, caverns, and steep-walled ravines caused by melting of ground ice. The hummocky ground surface resembles karst topography in limestone areas. Thawing may result from artificial or natural removal\u2026 More About Thermokarst1 reference found in Britannica articlesAssorted Referencespermafrost In permafrost: Thermokarst formations Article History Article Contributors Feedback Corrections? Updates? Help us improve this article! Contact our editors with your feedback. Thermokarst Quick Facts related topicsPermafrost Karst Edit Mode Thermokarst Geology Tips for Editing Leave Edit Mode Submit Tips For Editing We welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. You can make it easier for us to review and, hopefully, publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind. Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience. You may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered. Any text you add should be original, not copied from other sources. At the bottom of the article, feel free to list any sources that support your changes, so that we can fully understand their context. (Internet URLs are the best.) Your contribution may be further edited by our staff, and its publication is subject to our final approval. Unfortunately, our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions. Submit Thank You for Your Contribution! Our editors will review what you've submitted, and if it meets our criteria, we'll add it to the article. Please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors, and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed. Uh Oh There was a problem with your submission. Please try again later. Close Keep Exploring Britannica Volcano Volcano, vent in the crust of the Earth or another planet or satellite, from which issue eruptions of\u2026 Read this Article Democracy Democracy, literally, rule by the people. The term is derived from the Greek d\u0113mokrati\u0101, which was coined\u2026 Read this Article Marketing Marketing, the sum of activities involved in directing the flow of goods and services from producers\u2026 Read this Article View More Stay Connected Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Pinterest Newsletters About Us About Our Ads Partner Program Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use \u00a92019 Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica, Inc. Menu Home Demystified Quizzes Galleries Lists On This Day Biographies Newsletters Login Join Thermokarst geology Print Cite Share SHARE Facebook Twitter Feedback Feedback Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login). Select feedback type: Select a type (Required) Factual Correction Spelling/Grammar Correction Link Correction Additional Information Other Submit Feedback If you prefer to suggest your own revision of the article, you can go to edit mode (requires login). Thank you for your feedback Our editors will review what you\u2019ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. Join Britannica's Publishing Partner Program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work! Share SHARE Facebook Twitter Search \u00d7 close Britannica Celebrates 100 Women Trailblazers", "Thermokarst - Wikipedia Thermokarst From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search A land surface with very irregular surfaces of marshy hollows and small hummocks formed as ice-rich permafrost thaws Permafrost thaw ponds in Hudson Bay, Canada in 2008. Thermokarst is a land surface characterised by very irregular surfaces of marshy hollows and small hummocks formed as ice-rich permafrost thaws, that occurs in Arctic areas, and on a smaller scale in mountainous areas such as the Himalayas and the Swiss Alps. These pitted surfaces resemble those formed by solution in some karst areas of limestone, which is how they came to have karst attached to their name without the presence of any limestone. Small domes that form on the surface due to frost heaving with the onset of winter are only temporary features. They then collapse with the arrival of next summer's thaw and leave a small surface depression. Some ice lenses grow and form larger surface hummocks, which last many years and sometimes become covered with grasses and sedges, until they begin to thaw. These domed surfaces eventually collapse either annually or after longer periods and form depressions which contribute to uneven surfaces. These are included within the general label of thermokarst. The Batagaika crater in Siberia is an example of a large thermokarst depression. Contents 1 Thermokarst lakes 1.1 Life cycle 1.1.1 Initiation 1.1.2 Development/expansion 1.1.3 Drainage 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Thermokarst lakes[edit] A thermokarst lake, also called a thaw lake, tundra lake, thaw depression, or tundra pond,[1] refers to a body of freshwater, usually shallow, that is formed in a depression formed by thawing ice-rich permafrost.[2] A key indicator of thermokarst lakes is the occurrence of excess ground ice as well as having an ice content with greater than 30% by volume.[3] Continued thawing of the permafrost substrate can lead to the drainage and eventual disappearance of thermokarst lakes, leaving them, in such cases, a geomorphologically temporary phenomenon, formed in response to a warming climate.[4] Thermokarst lakes tend to form and disappear in a cyclical manner, resulting in a predictable life cycle (see \"life cycle\" below). These lakes are typically found in arctic and subarctic lowlands, including the western Canadian Arctic[5] (e.g. Banks Island, Victoria island), the Alaskan coastal plain,[6][7] interior Yukon territory [8] and the alluvial lowlands of northern Eurasia and Siberia.[9][10][11][12] The presence of thaw lakes in a region results in a thermal disturbance as the water warms the ground. The depth of permafrost below a lake will generally be shallower and if the lake is of sufficient depth, a talik is present. The general morphology (shape, depth, circumference) is variable, with some thaw lakes oriented, meaning they are generally elongated in a specific direction. Though their formation mechanism has not been definitively proven, it is believed to be related to the prevailing winds or storms.[13] The disturbance (of either nature) leads to overall warming and melting of ground ice, after which surface subsidence occurs allowing for water infiltration of either surface water or melted ground ice.[14] Life cycle[edit] Initiation[edit] The initiation of a thaw lake begins with the degradation of ice-rich permafrost. The natural inception of thermokarst lakes can be demarcated into two separate processes; whether in continuous or discontinuous permafrost. In continuous permafrost, water accumulates when ice veins and polygonal ground are present.[15] Through discontinuous permafrost, it is when thaw occurs in palsas (frozen peat cores) or in lithalsas (mineral core mounds).[16] Permafrost degradation is typically linked to a surface disturbance, either natural or artificial, in combination with site-specific factors, such as permafrost ice-content, ground temperature, etc.[17] Development/expansion[edit] Development of thaw lakes tends to be slow at first, but once the average lake bottom temperature exceeds 0\u00a0\u00b0C the lake ceases freezing to the bottom and thaw becomes continuous. The lake grows as ice thaws, which may result in the slumping of shorelines or submergence of vegetation, which is why thaw lakes in the boreal forest tend to be surrounded by \u201cdrunken trees\u201d.[18] It should be specified that \u201cdrunken trees\u201d (also known as drunken forests) occur within Yedoma regimes. This feature is not present throughout all thermokarst regions. Upon expansion in this stage, thermokarst lakes often take on an elongated shape with ordered alignment in the long axis.[19] If lakes form in an area of ice-rich permafrost, coalescence of several smaller lakes may occur, producing a larger body of water, magnifying the thermal disturbance. Development may be further facilitated by lateral bank erosion.[20] Additionally, thermal abrasion of thermokarst lake edges can expand the lake size, as well as lake bottom subsidence.[21] Additionally, oriented morphology of lakes can take on shapes such as \u201celliptical, egg-shaped, tri- angular, rectangular, clam-shaped, or D-shaped\u201d,[22] and commonly occur in terrain with sandy sediments.[23] Throughout the literature on orientation and morphology of thermokarst lakes, polemic scholastic discussions pertaining to how lake shape is developed are commonplace. However, Grosse et al. (2013) publication Thermokarst lakes, drainage, and drained basins summarizes endogenous and exogenous elements that are key factors in orientation including: redistribution of littoral shelves by wind creating insulation, arrangement of polygonal ice-wedges producing thawing, and erosion from fluvial channels causing inhomogeneous sediments. Clearly there is a multitude of reasonings to explain the shape of lakes, not just centred around wind movement. Drainage[edit] Before complete drainage, lake edges recede through retrogressive thaw slumping and subaerial debris flows. Actual drainage may be triggered by fluvial erosion or expansion of adjacent basins at inland locations. In coastal areas, drainage may be due to coastal retreat leading to thermal abrasion or erosion due to wave action. More gradual drainage (partial or complete) may be caused by local permafrost degradation and erosion.[24] Lakes stop growing once drainage initiated, and eventually depressions are filled by sediments, aquatic plants or peat. Another option for the fate of a drained thaw lake is that the active layer surrounding the lake deepens to below water level once ground ice is exhausted, allowing for a residual lake to remain.[25] The formation of permafrost thaw lakes due to warming climate is a positive feedback loop, as methane and carbon dioxide are released as permafrost thaws, contributing to further climate warming.[26] See also[edit] Arctic sea ice decline\u00a0\u2013 The sea ice loss observed in recent decades in the Arctic Ocean Alas\u00a0\u2013 A shallow depression formed by subsidence of the Arctic permafrost Deglaciation Pingo\u00a0\u2013 A mound of earth-covered ice References[edit] ^ Black, R.F (1969). \"Thaw depressions and thaw lakes; a review\". Biuletyn Peryglacjalny. 19: 131\u2013150. ^ Bucksch, Herbert. Dictionary Geotechnical Engineering. New York, Springer, 1997. ^ Grosse, G., Jones, B., Arp, C., 2013. Thermokarst lakes, drainage, and drained basins. In: Shroder, J. (Editor in Chief), Giardino, R., Harbor, J. (Eds.), Treatise on Geomorphology. Academic Press, San Diego, CA, vol. 8, Glacial and Periglacial Geomorphology, pp. 325\u2013353. ^ Phillips, M., Arenson, L.U., Springman, S.M. (2003). \"Permafrost\". In Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Permafrost, 21\u201325 July 2003, Zurich Switzerland: 660.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Mackay (1963). \"The Mackenzie Delta area\". Geographical Branch Memoir. 8: 202. ^ Hinkel, K. M., Frohn, R. C., Nelson, F. E., Eisner,W. R., Beck, R. A. (2005). \"Morphometric and spatial analysis of thaw lakes and drained thaw-lake basins in the Western Arctic Coastal Plain, Alaska\". Permafrost and Periglacial Processes. 16: 327\u2013342.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Sellmann, P.V., Brown, J., Lewellen, R.I., McKim, H. and Merry, C. (1975). \"The classification and geomorphic implications of thaw lakes on the Arctic Coastal Plain, Alaska\". COLD REGIONS RESEARCH AND ENGINEERING LAB HANOVER NH.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Burn, C. R., Smith, M.W. (1988). \"Thermokarst lakes at Mayo, Yukon Territory, Canada\". In Senneset, K., ed., Permafrost, Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Permafrost, 2\u20135 August 1988, Tapir Trondheim: 700\u2013705.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Dostovalov, B. N., Kudryavtsev, V. A. (1967). \"Obshcheye mierzlotovedeniya\". Moscow State University: 463.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Morgenstern, A., Grosse, G., Fedorova, I., Schirrmeister, L. (2011). \"Spatial analysis of thermokarst lakes and basins in Yedoma landscapes of the Lena Delta\". The Cryosphere. 5: 849\u2013867.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Romanovskii, N. N., Hubberten, H.-W., Gavrilov, A. V., Tumskoy, V. E., Tipenko, G. S., Grigoriev, M. N. (2000). \"Thermokarst and land\u2013ocean interactions, Laptev Sea region, Russia\". Permafrost and Periglacial Processes. 11: 137\u2013152.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Tomirdiaro, S. V., Ryabchun, V. K. (1978). \"Lake thermokarst on the Lower Anadyr Lowland\". In Permafrost: USSR Contribution to the Second International Conference, Yakutsk, USSR. Washington, DC, National Academy of Sciences: 94\u2013100.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ French, H.M. (2018). The periglacial environment. John Wiley & Sons Ltd. ^ Grosse, G., Jones, B. and Arp, C. (2013). \"Thermokarst lakes, drainage, and drained basins\".CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Czudek, T., & Demek, J. (1970). Thermokarst in Siberia and Its Influence on the Development of Lowland Relief. Quaternary Research, 1(1), 103-120. doi:10.1016/0033-5894(70)90013 ^ Luoto, M. and Sepp\u00e4l\u00e4, M. (2003), Thermokarst ponds as indicators of the former distribution of palsas in Finnish Lapland. Permafrost Periglac. Process., 14: 19-27. doi:10.1002/ppp.441 ^ Burn, C.R. and Lewkowicz, A.G. (1990). \"Canadian landform examples\u201017 retrogressive thaw slumps\". The Canadian Geographer. 34 (3): 273\u2013276.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Burn, C.R. and Lewkowicz, A.G. (1990). \"Canadian landform examples\u201017 retrogressive thaw slumps\". The Canadian Geographer. 34 (3): 273\u2013276.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ French, H. M. (2007). The periglacial environment. Retrieved from https://ebookcentral.proquest.com ^ French, H.M. (2018). The periglacial environment. John Wiley & Sons Ltd. ^ Romanovsky, V., Isaksen, K., Drozdov, D., Anisimov, O., Instanes, A., Leibman, M., McGuire, A.D., Shiklomanov, N., Smith, S., Walker, D. (2017). Changing permafrost and its impacts. In: C. Symon (Eds.), Snow, Water, Ice and Permafrost in the Arctic (SWIPA) (65-102). Oslo, Norway: Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP). ^ Grosse, G., Jones, B., Arp, C., 2013. Thermokarst lakes, drainage, and drained basins. In: Shroder, J. (Editor in Chief), Giardino, R., Harbor, J. (Eds.), Treatise on Geomorphology. Academic Press, San Diego, CA, vol. 8, Glacial and Periglacial Geomorphology, pp. 325\u2013353. ^ Grosse, G., Jones, B., Arp, C., 2013. Thermokarst lakes, drainage, and drained basins. In: Shroder, J. (Editor in Chief), Giardino, R., Harbor, J. (Eds.), Treatise on Geomorphology. Academic Press, San Diego, CA, vol. 8, Glacial and Periglacial Geomorphology, pp. 325\u2013353. ^ Grosse, G., Jones, B. and Arp, C. (2013). \"Thermokarst lakes, drainage, and drained basins\".CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Burn, C.R. and Lewkowicz, A.G. (1990). \"Canadian landform examples\u201017 retrogressive thaw slumps\". The Canadian Geographer. 34 (3): 273\u2013276.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Van Huissteden, J., Berrittella, C., Parmentier, F.J.W., Mi, Y., Maximov, T.C. and Dolman, A.J. (2011). \"Methane emissions from permafrost thaw lakes limited by lake drainage\". Nature Climate Change. 1 (2): 119.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) External links[edit] New Scientist article UCAR press release vtePeriglacial environmentLandforms Blockfield Bratschen Cryoplanation terrace Glacial erratic Paha Palsa Periglacial lake Pingo Protalus rampart Rock glacier Strandflat Glaciokarst Thermokarst Patterned ground Frost boil Polygons Solifluction lobes and sheets Sorted stripe Stone ring Processes Cryoplanation Cryosuction Cryoturbation Fluvio-thermal erosion Frost heave Frost weathering Gelifluction Ice segregation Methane release Nivation Solifluction Syngenetic permafrost growth Zero-curtain effect Soils and deposits Active layer Gelisols Ice wedge Loess Peat Permafrost Stratified slope deposit Talik Yedoma Biomes and ecotones Arctic tundra Arctic tree line Antarctic oasis Antarctic tundra Montane grasslands and shrublands Alpine tundra Alpine tree line (Massenerhebung effect) Taiga (Drunken trees) Climate Alpine Polar Subpolar Category:Periglacial landforms Template:Glaciers Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thermokarst&oldid=883070911\" Categories: Periglacial landformsPatterned groundsPermafrostHidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listArticles with short description Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces ArticleTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages \u0627\u0644\u0639\u0631\u0628\u064a\u0629Az\u0259rbaycanca\u0411\u0435\u043b\u0430\u0440\u0443\u0441\u043a\u0430\u044f\u0411\u0435\u043b\u0430\u0440\u0443\u0441\u043a\u0430\u044f (\u0442\u0430\u0440\u0430\u0448\u043a\u0435\u0432\u0456\u0446\u0430)\u200e\u010ce\u0161tinaDeutschEestiEspa\u00f1olFran\u00e7aisItaliano\u10e5\u10d0\u10e0\u10d7\u10e3\u10da\u10d8\u65e5\u672c\u8a9eO\u02bbzbekcha/\u045e\u0437\u0431\u0435\u043a\u0447\u0430PolskiPortugu\u00eas\u0420\u0443\u0441\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439\u0421\u0430\u0445\u0430 \u0442\u044b\u043b\u0430SuomiT\u00fcrk\u00e7e\u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0441\u044c\u043a\u0430 Edit links This page was last edited on 13 February 2019, at 03:10\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "New permafrost map shows regions vulnerable to thaw, carbon release Skip to content Search for: UNIVERSITY OF ALASKA FAIRBANKS UAF news and information News Latest news Campus Public Information Officers Events Employees Students Nanooks in the news Aurora Current issue Aurora archives About Aurora Grapevine Latest Grapevine Submit a Question or Suggestion Grapevine archives Experts guide Submission New permafrost map shows regions vulnerable to thaw, carbon release Marmian Grimes 907-474-7902 October 11, 2016October 12, 2016 A new mapping project has identified regions worldwide that are most susceptible to dramatic permafrost thaw formations, known as thermokarst, and the resulting release of greenhouse gases. University of Alaska Fairbanks researchers David McGuire and Vladimir Romanovsky were part of the project, which was led by University of Alberta researcher David Olefeldt. They found that about 20 percent of the globe\u2019s northern permafrost region is potential thermokarst landscape. The research\u00a0can be used in\u00a0infrastructure and ecosystem planning and greenhouse gas modeling. The journal Nature Communications published\u00a0the\u00a0study\u00a0this week. Northern permafrost soils store twice as much carbon as is currently in the atmosphere. When permafrost thaws, the organic matter in the previously frozen soil begins to decay, releasing greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide and methane. Those gases can contribute to climate warming and further permafrost thaw. \u201cThe most dramatic changes are likely to occur where permafrost thaw is accompanied by land surface collapse, known as thermokarst,\u201d Olefeldt said. Scientists can use the new map to test assumptions about how fast the soil organic matter will turn into greenhouse gases in these areas. Thermokarst occurs when thawing soil contains large amounts of ice. When that soil and ice thaws, the water drains away, leaving a void that can lead to more than two dozen distinct collapse landforms, including gullies, slumps, wetlands and lakes. Each type affects greenhouse gas emissions in its own way, and up until now no one has been able to account for all of them at the global scale. \u201cThere haven\u2019t been good estimates on how thermokarst disturbance could affect the release of carbon out of the soil,\u201d said McGuire, who is part of the Alaska Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit at the UAF Institute of Arctic Biology and U.S. Geological Survey. Scientists have been hindered by both the diversity of the thermokarst landforms and a lack of information on where these thermokarst landforms are most likely to occur in a warming world. \u201cThis map is a first step to answer how the landscape will change with the thawing of permafrost in a warming climate. This is the big picture, it is useful as a general idea of what we should expect on a circumpolar scale,\u201d said Romanovsky, a researcher at the UAF Geophysical Institute. One of the most important results of the project was developing\u00a0a\u00a0method to prepare a map that will help scientists and resource managers estimate the effects of a warming climate on permafrost in these regions, Romanovsky said. \u201cIn Alaska we can see that some areas will be more vulnerable than others. For example, you can see from the map that the Yukon Delta and the North Slope regions will probably undergo significant landscape changes.\u201d The thermokarst landscape map is available to anyone through the online site hosted by the U.S. Department of Energy\u2019s Oakridge National Laboratory in Tennessee. ADDITIONAL CONTACTS: LJ Evans, 907-474-2737, ljevans@alaska.edu. Vladimir Romanovsky, 907-474-7459, veromanovsky@alaska.edu. David McGuire, admcguire@alaska.edu. Helen Metella, University of Alberta, 780-248-5830, metella@ualberta.ca. NOTE TO EDITORS: McGuire will have sporadic phone contact this week. Please email him to set up an interview time. ON THE WEB: https://daac.ornl.gov/SOILS/guides/Thermokarst_Circumpolar_Map.html http://www.nature.com/ncomms/ Associated tags arctic | College of Natural Science and Mathematics | Geophysical Institute | Institute of Arctic Biology | Research Share the story! Related articles Hayley Lanier: \u2018Mammals on mountaintops\u2019 Arctic change is impacting lower latitudes Poker Flat celebrates 50 years of rocket launches UAF discovery could mean breakthrough in hard drive storage Join the conversation, leave a reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name * Email * Follow UAF on Facebook Follow UAF on Instagram Follow UAF on Pinterest Follow UAF on Spotify Follow UAF on Tumblr Follow UAF on Twitter Follow UAF on YouTube #nanooknation The University of Alaska Fairbanks is accredited by the Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities.UAF is an AA/EO employer and educational institution and prohibits illegal discrimination against any individual. Learn more about UA's notice of nondiscrimination. UA is committed to providing accessible websites. Learn more about UA's notice of web accessibility.For questions or comments regarding this page, contact uaf-web@alaska.edu | \u24d2 UA", "What is Thermokarst? - WorldAtlas.com Continents Africa Antarctica Arctic Asia Caribbean Central America Europe Middle East North America Oceania South America Islands Countries Popular United States United Kingdom Canada Russia North Korea All Countries End of list Answers Travel Society Economics Environment World Facts Worldatlas on facebook Environment What is Thermokarst? Thermokarsts generally form in the Arctic regions and are a result of the melting of permafrost ground. Thermokarst occurs when permafrost melts. Pictured here is melting permafrost in Russia. What is a Thermokarst? A thermokarst refers to the formation of a landscape as a result of the melting of permafrost ground. It is caused by anything that depletes the layer of land vegetation such as natural erosion, deforestation, agriculture, and the construction of buildings. In addition, thermokarsts may also form because of movement of heavy vehicles above a permafrost zone. The size of the thermokarst is directly proportional to the amount of ice underneath the surface of land. The size of a thermokarst depends on the extent and size of the melted ice. In most cases, thermokarsts form in Arctic areas. However, sometimes they may form in mountainous regions like the Swiss Alps and the Himalayas. Example of a Thermokarst An example of a large thermokarst depression is the Batagaika crater which is located in East Siberia, Sakha Republic in Russia. It is about 100 meters deep and one kilometer long. The land which formed the Batagaika crater started sinking as a result of the thawing permafrost in 1960s. The forest around it had been cleared and there was great flooding. The crater\u2019s rim is very unstable which often leads to regular landslides. The permafrost beneath the crater still thaws. Furthermore, the crater is still enlarging by each day. Apart from the Batagaika crater, there are other thermokarst lakes in Siberia and tundra environments. What Does the Formation of a Thermokarst Indicate? The formation of Thermokarsts points towards several issues. First, it indicates that the climate has become warmer than it was in the past. The rising temperature causes the permafrost to melt and thereby forms a thermokarst. Observations indicate a rise in temperatures in the arctic region to be about 2 to 4\u25e6C. Secondly, thermokarsts point towards an inrease in the precipitation patterns. The increase in temperatures leads to an increase in precipitation. As a result, rainwater and the melted permafrost begin forming small valleys or sinks. Effect of the Thermokarsts The melting of the permafrost results into creation of small ponds which may enlarge and become thermokarst lakes. A thermokarst lake forms from the thawed ice. The lake dries up in case thawing continues, leaving a depression in its place. Another effect of the melting of water underneath the earth\u2019s surface is high risk of collapse. The collapse leads to formation of a landscape whose features are sinkholes, hummocks, caverns, and tunnels. Such a landscape is referred to as a thermokarst terrain or thaw settlement. How to Cope in an Area with High Tendencies of Thermokarst Formation Most people who live in thermokarst prone areas prefer to build their houses on stilts. It helps in the prevention of melting of the ice. According to a study by the University of Alaska Fairbanks researchers, most of the globes northern permafrost regions are prone to having thermokarst landscapes. It should be noted though that thermokarsts have a negative effect on the environment. Thawing results in the release of greenhouse gases like methane and carbon dioxide. Hence, thermokarsts are a fabulous land formation story, but they are harmful too. The frequent landslides and air pollution make them harmful to the environment. This page was last updated on September 21, 2017. By Sharon Omondi On WorldAtlas.com More in Environment Where Are the Aleutian Islands? What Is The Continental Climate? What Are The Primary Inflows And Outflows Of Lake Erie? What Are The Primary Inflows And Outflows Of Lake Edward? What Are The Major Rivers Of West Africa? What Is Occultation In Astronomy? Most Recent The Longest Rivers in Armenia Longest Rivers in Austria Country Names With 10 Letters The Longest Rivers in Mongolia Manhattan Neighborhoods by Population Most Popular Countries With the Most Natural Resources Which Country Has the Most Islands? The Hottest And Coldest Planets Of Our Solar System Load comments What is Thermokarst? Share Tweet Pin Popular Atlas Pages Africa Antarctica Asia Oceania Caribbean Central America Europe Middle East North America South America Arctic Islands USA Canada Definition of Geography 5 Themes of Geography What Is Cartography? What Is a Leap Year? Quizzes US Map Popular Reference Pages Did You Know? Bodies of Water Continents Countries (a list) Country Codes (all) Currency Conversion Current Time (anywhere) Distances Equator Find Any Address Find Any City Flags Hemispheres Latitude and Longitude Map Tests Oceans (all) Outline Maps Populations (cities & countries) Prime Meridian USA Times World Maps United States Area Codes General Information Advertise with us Contact Us About Us Privacy Statement Copyright information Graphic Maps Featured Photos Featured Videos Want to Become a Writer? All maps, graphics, flags, photos and original descriptions \u00a9 2019 worldatlas.com Worldatlas on Facebook", "Thermokarst Lakes as a Source of Atmospheric CH4 During the Last Deglaciation | Science Skip to main content HomeNewsJournalsTopicsCareers Search Search Toggle menu Search Search Log in My account Contact Us Become a member Renew my subscription Sign up for newsletters . Facebook Twitter Google+ Rss Authors Members Librarians Advertisers HomeRecent VideosLatest PodcastsPhoto GalleriesDance Your Ph.D. ContestData Stories ContestNewsLatest NewsScienceInsiderScienceShotsSifterFrom the MagazineAbout NewsQuizzesJournalsScienceScience AdvancesScience ImmunologyScience RoboticsScience SignalingScience Translational MedicineScience Partner JournalsTopicsAll TopicsSpecial IssuesCustom PublishingCareersArticlesFind JobsCareer ResourcesForumFor EmployersEmployer ProfilesGraduate ProgramsBookletsAdvertising Features Search Search share Report Thermokarst Lakes as a Source of Atmospheric CH4 During the Last Deglaciation K. M. Walter1,2,*, M. E. Edwards3,4, G. Grosse5, S. A. Zimov6, F. S. Chapin III71 Water and Environmental Research Center, University of Alaska, Fairbanks, AK 99775, USA.2 International Arctic Research Center, University of Alaska, Fairbanks, AK 99775, USA.3 School of Geography, University of Southampton, UK.4 College of Natural Sciences, University of Alaska, Fairbanks, AK 99775, USA.5 Geophysical Institute, University of Alaska, Fairbanks, AK 99775, USA.6 Northeast Science Station, Pacific Institute for Geography, Russian Academy of Sciences, Russia.7 Institute of Arctic Biology, University of Alaska, Fairbanks, AK 99775, USA.\u21b5* To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: ftkmw1{at}uaf.edu See allHide authors and affiliations Science\u00a0 26 Oct 2007:Vol. 318, Issue 5850, pp. 633-636DOI: 10.1126/science.1142924 K. M. Walter Water and Environmental Research Center, University of Alaska, Fairbanks, AK 99775, USA. International Arctic Research Center, University of Alaska, Fairbanks, AK 99775, USA.Find this author on Google Scholar Find this author on PubMed Search for this author on this site M. E. Edwards School of Geography, University of Southampton, UK. College of Natural Sciences, University of Alaska, Fairbanks, AK 99775, USA.Find this author on Google Scholar Find this author on PubMed Search for this author on this site G. Grosse Geophysical Institute, University of Alaska, Fairbanks, AK 99775, USA.Find this author on Google Scholar Find this author on PubMed Search for this author on this site S. A. Zimov Northeast Science Station, Pacific Institute for Geography, Russian Academy of Sciences, Russia.Find this author on Google Scholar Find this author on PubMed Search for this author on this site F. S. Chapin Institute of Arctic Biology, University of Alaska, Fairbanks, AK 99775, USA.Find this author on Google Scholar Find this author on PubMed Search for this author on this site Article Figures & Data Info & Metrics eLetters PDF Log in to view full text via AAAS login AAAS login provides access to Science for AAAS members, and access to other journals in the Science family to users who have purchased individual subscriptions. Become a AAAS member Activate account Add journals Account help Register for free to read this article As a service to the community, this article is available for free. Existing users log in. Become a AAAS member Account help Log in through your institutionLog in via OpenAthens. Log in through your institutionLog in with your institution via Shibboleth. More options Purchase digital access to this article Download and print this article for your personal scholarly, research, and educational use.Purchase this issue in print Buy a single issue of Science for just $15 USD. Science Vol 318, Issue 585026 October 2007 Table of Contents Article Tools Email Thank you for your interest in spreading the word about Science.NOTE: We only request your email address so that the person you are recommending the page to knows that you wanted them to see it, and that it is not junk mail. We do not capture any email address. Your Email Your Name Send To Enter multiple addresses on separate lines or separate them with commas. You are going to email the following Thermokarst Lakes as a Source of Atmospheric CH4 During the Last Deglaciation Message Subject (Your Name) has forwarded a page to you from Science Message Body (Your Name) thought you would like to see this page from the Science web site. Your Personal Message Send Message Download Powerpoint Print Save to my folders Log In with your AAAS Login Alerts Please log in to add an alert for this article. Log In with your AAAS Login Sign In to Email Alerts with your Email Address Email Log in Citation tools Thermokarst Lakes as a Source of Atmospheric CH4 During the Last Deglaciation By K. M. Walter, M. E. Edwards, G. Grosse, S. A. Zimov, F. S. Chapin III Science26 Oct 2007 : 633-636 Large amounts of methane, a greenhouse gas, were released during the last deglaciation from lakes that formed as exposed ground thawed in northern high latitudes. Citation Manager Formats BibTeX Bookends EasyBib EndNote (tagged) EndNote 8 (xml) Medlars Mendeley Papers RefWorks Tagged Ref Manager RIS Zotero Share Thermokarst Lakes as a Source of Atmospheric CH4 During the Last Deglaciation By K. M. Walter, M. E. Edwards, G. Grosse, S. A. Zimov, F. S. Chapin III Science26 Oct 2007 : 633-636 Large amounts of methane, a greenhouse gas, were released during the last deglaciation from lakes that formed as exposed ground thawed in northern high latitudes. Share This Article: Copy Related Content Similar Articles in: Citing Articles in: Subjects Atmospheric Science Navigate This Article ArticleAbstractReferences and NotesFigures & DataInfo & MetricseLetters PDF Science 8 March 2019 Vol 363, Issue 6431 Feature Dubious diagnosis Conservation Animal cultures matter for conservation History of Science Nuclear fallout SCI COMMUN News at a glance Solid-State Physics Squeezing strong correlations from graphene Working Life Fighting through the gray Table of Contents About usJournals Leadership Team members Work at AAAS AdvertiseAdvertising kits Custom publishing For subscribersSite license info For members InternationalChinese Japanese HelpAccess & subscriptions Order a Single Issue Reprints & permissions Contact us Accessibility Stay Connected Facebook Twitter GooglePlus RSS Feeds \u00a9 2019 American Association for the Advancement of Science. All rights reserved. AAAS is a partner of\u00a0HINARI,\u00a0AGORA, OARE, CHORUS,\u00a0CLOCKSS,\u00a0CrossRef\u00a0and\u00a0COUNTER.\u00a0Science ISSN 1095-9203. Terms of Service Privacy Policy Contact Us", "An Error Occurred Setting Your User Cookie An Error Occurred Setting Your User Cookie This site uses cookies to improve performance. If your browser does not accept cookies, you cannot view this site. Setting Your Browser to Accept Cookies There are many reasons why a cookie could not be set correctly. Below are the most common reasons: You have cookies disabled in your browser. You need to reset your browser to accept cookies or to ask you if you want to accept cookies. Your browser asks you whether you want to accept cookies and you declined. To accept cookies from this site, use the Back button and accept the cookie. Your browser does not support cookies. Try a different browser if you suspect this. The date on your computer is in the past. If your computer's clock shows a date before 1 Jan 1970, the browser will automatically forget the cookie. To fix this, set the correct time and date on your computer. You have installed an application that monitors or blocks cookies from being set. You must disable the application while logging in or check with your system administrator. Why Does this Site Require Cookies? This site uses cookies to improve performance by remembering that you are logged in when you go from page to page. To provide access without cookies would require the site to create a new session for every page you visit, which slows the system down to an unacceptable level. What Gets Stored in a Cookie? This site stores nothing other than an automatically generated session ID in the cookie; no other information is captured. In general, only the information that you provide, or the choices you make while visiting a web site, can be stored in a cookie. For example, the site cannot determine your email name unless you choose to type it. Allowing a website to create a cookie does not give that or any other site access to the rest of your computer, and only the site that created the cookie can read it.", "Anthropocene - Journal - Elsevier Menu Search Search Search in: All Webpages Books Journals 10 results per page 20 results per page 50 results per page 100 results per page Home Journals Anthropocene ISSN: 2213-3054 Anthropocene Editor-in-Chief: Anne Chin View Editorial Board Submit Your Paper Enter your login details below. If you do not already have an account you will need to register here. Username Password I forgot my password Register new account Supports Open Access View Articles Guide for Authors Author instructions Download the \u2018Author Information Pack\u2019 PDF View \u2018Guide for Authors\u2019 online Useful links Journal Finder Download the \u2018Understanding the Publishing Process\u2019 PDF Track Your Paper Check submitted paper Due to migration of article submission systems, please check the status of your submitted manuscript in the relevant system below: Check the status of your submitted manuscript in EVISE Check the status of your submitted manuscript in EES: Username Password I forgot my password Track accepted paper Once production of your article has started, you can track the status of your article via Track Your Accepted Article. Order Journal Sample Issue Journal Metrics CiteScore: 3.70 \u2139 CiteScore: 2017: 3.700CiteScore measures the average citations received per document published in this title. CiteScore values are based on citation counts in a given year (e.g. 2015) to documents published in three previous calendar years (e.g. 2012 \u2013 14), divided by the number of documents in these three previous years (e.g. 2012 \u2013 14). Source Normalized Impact per Paper (SNIP): 1.337 \u2139 Source Normalized Impact per Paper (SNIP): 2017: 1.337SNIP measures contextual citation impact by weighting citations based on the total number of citations in a subject field. SCImago Journal Rank (SJR): 1.099 \u2139 SCImago Journal Rank (SJR): 2017: 1.099SJR is a prestige metric based on the idea that not all citations are the same. SJR uses a similar algorithm as the Google page rank; it provides a quantitative and a qualitative measure of the journal\u2019s impact. Your Research Data Share your research data Data in Brief co-submission When authors co-submit and publish a data article in Data in Brief, it appears on ScienceDirect linked to the original research article in this journal. Read More MethodsX co-submission When authors co-submit and publish a method article in MethodsX, it appears on ScienceDirect linked to the original research article in this journal. Read More Related Links Author Stats \u2139 Author Stats: Publishing your article with us has many benefits, such as having access to a personal dashboard: citation and usage data on your publications in one place. This free service is available to anyone who has published and whose publication is in Scopus. Researcher Academy Author Services Try out personalized alert features Anthropocene is an interdisciplinary peer-reviewed journal that addresses the nature, scale and extent of interactions between people and Earth processes and systems. The scope of the journal includes the significance of human activities in altering Earth\u2019s landscapes, oceans, the atmosphere, cryosphere... Read more Anthropocene is an interdisciplinary peer-reviewed journal that addresses the nature, scale and extent of interactions between people and Earth processes and systems. The scope of the journal includes the significance of human activities in altering Earth\u2019s landscapes, oceans, the atmosphere, cryosphere, and ecosystems over a range of time and space scales - from global phenomena over geologic eras to single isolated events - including the linkages, couplings, and feedbacks among physical, chemical, and biological components of Earth systems. The journal also addresses how such alterations can have profound effects on, and implications for, human society. As the scale and pace of human interactions with Earth systems have intensified in recent decades, understanding human-induced alterations in the past and present is critical to our ability to anticipate, mitigate, and adapt to changes in the future. The journal aims to provide a venue to focus research findings, discussions, and debates toward advancing predictive understanding of human interactions with Earth systems - one of the grand challenges of our time.The journal seeks contributions focused on the following themes:The early 'Anthropocene': How and when were past human interactions with Earth systems registered in the geologic and environmental records? Evidence and causes of large-scale human impacts; and quantifying recent, current and future anthropogenic impacts. Couplings among bio-physical and human processes, including societal responses to human-induced environmental change. Managing risk toward human-environmental sustainability in an 'Anthropocene' 21st century. Anthropocene welcomes the following types of manuscripts that meet the Aims and Scope of the journal:Original research articles that present new data and analyses toward answering specific questions, with typical length of text in the 5000-7000 word range. Research articles may include specific case studies if these studies demonstrate theoretical significance and broad systemic relevance.Review papers that assess the state of knowledge of a particular subfield or topic and point toward future research needs and directions. These review articles, with a typical length within 8000 words, may include some new data or synthesis of existing data that produce new understanding. Viewpoints that address timely topics, and discussions and replies of articles published in the journal. The length of these articles should be within 2000-4000 words. Hide full Aims & Scope Most Downloaded Recent Articles Most Cited Open Access Articles The onset of the Anthropocene Bruce D. Smith | Melinda A. Zeder The geological cycle of plastics and their use as a stratigraphic indicator of the Anthropocene Jan Zalasiewicz | Colin N. Waters | ... Land system science and sustainable development of the earth system: A global land project perspective - Open access Peter H. Verburg | Neville Crossman | ... View All Most Downloaded Articles Fallout melt debris and aerodynamically-shaped glasses in beach sands of Hiroshima Bay, Japan Mario M.A. Wannier | Marc de Urreiztieta | ... A framework for exploring and managing biocultural heritage Karl-Johan Lindholm | Anneli Ekblom Impact of climate change on precipitation patterns in Houston, Texas, USA Zhiying Li | Xiao Li | ... View All Recent Articles Terraced landscapes: From an old best practice to a potential hazard for soil degradation due to land abandonment Paolo Tarolli | Federico Preti | ... The geological cycle of plastics and their use as a stratigraphic indicator of the Anthropocene Jan Zalasiewicz | Colin N. Waters | ... Land system science and sustainable development of the earth system: A global land project perspective - Open access Peter H. Verburg | Neville Crossman | ... View All Most Cited Articles Anthropogenic use of fire led to degraded scots pine-lichen forest in northern Sweden - Open access G. H\u00f6rnberg | T. Josefsson | ... Permafrost livelihoods: A transdisciplinary review and analysis of thermokarst-based systems of indigenous land use - Open access Susan Crate | Mathias Ulrich | ... Exploring linked ecological and cultural tipping points in Mongolia - Open access Mar\u00eda E. Fern\u00e1ndez-Gim\u00e9nez | Niah H. Venable | ... View All Recent Open Access Articles Most Downloaded Articles The most downloaded articles from Anthropocene in the last 90 days. The onset of the Anthropocene Bruce D. Smith | Melinda A. Zeder The geological cycle of plastics and their use as a stratigraphic indicator of the Anthropocene Jan Zalasiewicz | Colin N. Waters | ... Land system science and sustainable development of the earth system: A global land project perspective - Open access Peter H. Verburg | Neville Crossman | ... View All Most Downloaded Articles Recent Articles Recently published articles from Anthropocene. Fallout melt debris and aerodynamically-shaped glasses in beach sands of Hiroshima Bay, Japan Mario M.A. Wannier | Marc de Urreiztieta | ... A framework for exploring and managing biocultural heritage Karl-Johan Lindholm | Anneli Ekblom Impact of climate change on precipitation patterns in Houston, Texas, USA Zhiying Li | Xiao Li | ... View All Recent Articles Most Cited Articles The most cited articles published since 2014, extracted from Scopus. Terraced landscapes: From an old best practice to a potential hazard for soil degradation due to land abandonment Paolo Tarolli | Federico Preti | ... The geological cycle of plastics and their use as a stratigraphic indicator of the Anthropocene Jan Zalasiewicz | Colin N. Waters | ... Land system science and sustainable development of the earth system: A global land project perspective - Open access Peter H. Verburg | Neville Crossman | ... View All Most Cited Articles Recent Open Access Articles The latest Open Access articles published in Anthropocene. Anthropogenic use of fire led to degraded scots pine-lichen forest in northern Sweden - Open access G. H\u00f6rnberg | T. Josefsson | ... Permafrost livelihoods: A transdisciplinary review and analysis of thermokarst-based systems of indigenous land use - Open access Susan Crate | Mathias Ulrich | ... Exploring linked ecological and cultural tipping points in Mongolia - Open access Mar\u00eda E. Fern\u00e1ndez-Gim\u00e9nez | Niah H. Venable | ... View All Recent Open Access Articles Review Articles Recently published review articles from Anthropocene Review Articles A framework for exploring and managing biocultural heritage Karl-Johan Lindholm | Anneli Ekblom The biodiversity of food and agriculture (Agrobiodiversity) in the anthropocene: Research advances and conceptual framework Karl S. Zimmerer | Stef de Haan | ... Uncharted waters: the rise of human-made aquatic environments in the age of the \u201cAnthropocene\u201d \u00c9milie Saulnier-Talbot | Isabelle Lavoie View All Articles Special Issues Special issues published in Anthropocene. Using palaeoecology to develop a past-present-future perspective on Sustainability Lindsey Gillson | Anneli Ekblom | ... Radioisotope behavior after Fukushima and other nuclear accidents Akihiro Kitamura | Patrick Laceby J | ... Challenges of the \"Anthropocene\" Anne Chin | Timothy Beach | ... View All Editors' Choices A hand-picked choice of authors\u2019 research and scientific articles from Anthropocene. Anthropogenic use of fire led to degraded scots pine-lichen forest in northern Sweden A 60-year historical record of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) pollution in lake sediment from Guangxi Province, Southern China Agricultural land use doubled sediment loads in western China's rivers View All News Indexing news Encyclopedia of the Anthropocene Call for papers View All Policies and Guidelines Information for Special Issue Guest Editors and Authors Data Deposit, Linking, and Citation Elsevier encourages authors to deposit raw experimental data sets underpinning their research publication in data repositories, and to enable interlinking of articles and data. View All \u4e0d\u8bba\u60a8\u662f\u6b63\u5728\u67e5\u627e\u51fa\u7248\u6d41\u7a0b\u7684\u4fe1\u606f\u8fd8\u662f\u5fd9\u4e8e\u64b0\u5199\u4e0b\u4e00\u7bc7\u7a3f\u4ef6\uff0c\u6211\u4eec\u90fd\u968f\u65f6\u5f85\u547d\u3002\u4e0b\u9762\u6211\u4eec\u5c06\u91cd\u70b9\u4ecb\u7ecd\u4e00\u4e9b\u53ef\u4ee5\u5728\u60a8\u7684\u79d1\u7814\u65c5\u7a0b\u4e2d\u5bf9\u60a8\u63d0\u4f9b\u652f\u6301\u7684\u5de5\u5177\u3002 \u5982\u4f55\u51fa\u7248\u6307\u5357 : \u4ece\u64b0\u5199\u6210\u529f\u7684\u8d44\u52a9\u8ba1\u5212\u4e66\u7684\u8981\u8bc0\u548c\u6280\u5de7\uff0c\u5230\u89e3\u91ca\u7814\u7a76\u4e0e\u51fa\u7248\u9053\u5fb7\uff0c\u6b64\u5916\u8fd8\u6709\u66f4\u591a\u5185\u5bb9\u3002 \u8bbf\u95ee\u7231\u601d\u552f\u5c14WebShop, \u4f7f\u7528\u8bed\u8a00\u6da6\u8272\u548c\u4e13\u4e1a\u91cd\u5370\u670d\u52a1\uff0c\u53e6\u5916\u60a8\u8fd8\u53ef\u4ee5\u4e0b\u8f7d\u514d\u8d39\u7684\u51fa\u7248\u8bc1\u4e66\u6765\u7eaa\u5ff5\u60a8\u6587\u7ae0\u7684\u51fa\u7248\u3002 \u7231\u601d\u552f\u5c14\u5728\u4e2d\u56fd : \u4e86\u89e3\u7231\u601d\u552f\u5c14\u7684\u4ea7\u54c1\u548c\u670d\u52a1\uff0c\u4ee5\u53ca\u5b83\u4eec\u5982\u4f55\u52a9\u529b\u7814\u7a76\u3002 \u5173\u6ce8\u6211\u4eec\u7684\u5fae\u4fe1\u516c\u4f17\u53f7\u83b7\u53d6\u6700\u65b0\u8d44\u8baf : PlumX Metrics Below is a recent list of 2017-2019 articles that have had the most social media attention. The Plum Print next to each article shows the relative activity in each of these categories of metrics: Captures, Mentions, Social Media and Citations. Go here to learn more about PlumX Metrics. The Working Group on the Anthropocene: Summary of evidence and interim recommendationsThe Working Group on the Anthropocene: Summary of evidence and interim recommendations The Working Group on the Anthropocene: Summary of evidence and interim recommendations A spatial model for evaluating the vulnerability of water management in Mexico City, Sao Paulo and Buenos Aires considering climate changeA spatial model for evaluating the vulnerability of water management in Mexico City, Sao Paulo and Buenos Aires considering climate change A spatial model for evaluating the vulnerability of water management in Mexico City, Sao Paulo and Buenos Aires considering climate change Earth as a Hybrid Planet: The Anthropocene in an Evolutionary Astrobiological ContextEarth as a Hybrid Planet: The Anthropocene in an Evolutionary Astrobiological Context Earth as a Hybrid Planet: The Anthropocene in an Evolutionary Astrobiological Context View All Anthropocene Readers View Articles Sample Issue Volume/ Issue Alert Personalized Recommendations Authors Author Information Pack Submit Your Paper Track Your Paper Early Career Resources Rights and Permissions Support Center Librarians Ordering Information and Dispatch Dates Editors Publishing Ethics Resource Kit Guest Editors Support Center Reviewers Log in as Reviewer Reviewer Recognition Support Center Societies Close Products & Solutions R & D Solutions Clinical Solutions Research Platforms Research Intelligence Education Services Authors Editors Reviewers Librarians Shop & Discover Books and Journals Author Webshop About Elsevier About us Elsevier Connect Careers How can we help? Support Center Copyright \u00a9 2019 Elsevier B.V. Careers - Terms and Conditions - Privacy Policy Cookies are used by this site. To decline or learn more, visit our Cookies page.", "Thermokarst rates intensify due to climate change and forest fragmentation in an Alaskan boreal forest lowland. - Semantic Scholar Skip to search formSkip to main contentSemantic ScholarAll FieldsComputer ScienceMedicineFAQContactSign inThermokarst rates intensify due to climate change and forest fragmentation in an Alaskan boreal forest lowland.@article{Lara2016ThermokarstRI, title={Thermokarst rates intensify due to climate change and forest fragmentation in an Alaskan boreal forest lowland.}, author={Mark J. Lara and H{\\'e}l{\\`e}ne Genet and A David McGuire and Eug{\\'e}nie S. Euskirchen and Yujin Zhang and Dana R. N. Brown and M. Torre Jorgenson and Vladimir E. Romanovsky and Amy L. Breen and William R. Bolton}, journal={Global change biology}, year={2016}, volume={22 2}, pages={ 816-29 } }Mark J. Lara, H\u00e9l\u00e8ne Genet, +7 authors William R. BoltonPublished in Global change biology 2016DOI:10.1111/gcb.13124Lowland boreal forest ecosystems in Alaska are dominated by wetlands comprised of a complex mosaic of fens, collapse-scar bogs, low shrub/scrub, and forests growing on elevated ice-rich permafrost soils. Thermokarst has affected the lowlands of the Tanana Flats in central Alaska for centuries, as thawing permafrost collapses forests that transition to wetlands. Located within the discontinuous permafrost zone, this region has significantly warmed over the past half-century, and much of these\u2026\u00a0CONTINUE READINGView on PubMedSave to LibraryCreate AlertCiteFrom This PaperFigures, tables, and topics from this paper.Figures & Tablestable 1Explore Further: Topics Discussed in This PaperPermafrostPiceaClimate ChangeWetlandsForestsEcosystemBetula GenusEstimatedSoilGradientCitationsPublications citing this paper.SHOWING 1-4 OF 4 CITATIONSDifferences in behavior and distribution of permafrost-related lakes in Central Yakutia and their response to climatic driversMathias Ulrich, Heidrun Matthes, +5 authors Alexey N. Fedorov2017Highly Influenced7 ExcerptsRegional atmospheric cooling and wetting effect of permafrost thaw-induced boreal forest loss.Manuel Helbig, Karoline Wischnewski, +4 authors Oliver SonnentagGlobal change biology2016Highly Influenced6 ExcerptsDirect and indirect climate change effects on carbon dioxide fluxes in a thawing boreal forest-wetland landscape.Manuel Helbig, Laura E. Chasmer, Ankur R. Desai, Natascha Kljun, William L. Quinton, Oliver SonnentagGlobal change biology20171 ExcerptPresence of rapidly degrading permafrost plateaus in south-central Alaska 2675Benjamin M. Jones, Carson A. Baughman, +6 authors Edward E. Berg2016ReferencesPublications referenced by this paper.SHOWING 1-10 OF 64 REFERENCESSort by:InfluenceRecencyForests on thawing permafrost: fragmentation, edge effects, and net forest loss.Jennifer L. Baltzer, Tyler Veness, Laura E. Chasmer, Anastasia E Sniderhan, William L. QuintonGlobal change biology2014Highly Influential7 ExcerptsA Century of Climate Change for FairbanksG Wendler, M ShulskiAlaska. Arctic,2009Highly Influential5 ExcerptsRecent changes in the fire regime across the North American boreal region \u2014 Spatial and temporal patterns of burning across Canada and AlaskaEric S. Kasischke, Merritt R. Turetsky2006Highly Influential15 ExcerptsPERMAFROST DEGRADATION AND ECOLOGICAL CHANGES ASSOCIATED WITH A WARMING CLIMATE IN CENTRAL ALASKAM. Torre Jorgenson, Charles H. Racine, James Copeland Walters, T. E. Osterkamp2001Highly Influential27 ExcerptsObservations of thermokarst and its impact on boreal forests in Alaska, U.S.A.T. E. Osterkamp, Leslie A. Viereck, +4 authors Richard D. Boone2000Highly Influential8 ExcerptsChanges in fire regime break the legacy lock on successional trajectories in Alaskan boreal forestL F J O H N S T O N, A N H O L L I N G S W O R T H Z, F S T U A R T C H A P I N, I I I W And M I C H2009Highly Influential5 ExcerptsCharacteristics of Permafrost in the Tanana Flats, interior AlaskaJC Walters, CH Racine, MT JorgensonIn Proceedings 7th International Conference on\u20261998Highly Influential5 ExcerptsThermokarst vegetation in lowland birch forests on the Tanana Flats, interior Alaska, U.S.ACH Racine, MT Jorgenson, JC WaltersIn Proceedings 7th International Conference on\u20261998Highly Influential6 ExcerptsModeling impacts of fire severity on successional trajectories and future fire behavior in Alaskan boreal forestsJill F. Johnstone, Tille Rupp, Mark Olson, David VerbylaLandscape Ecology2011Highly Influential4 ExcerptsPhysical and Ecological Changes Associated with Warming Permafrost and Thermokarst in Interior AlaskaT. E. Osterkamp, M. Torre Jorgenson, +4 authors Vladimir E. Tumskoy2009Highly Influential4 Excerpts\u203912345\u203aSimilar Papers Loading similar papers\u2026The Allen Institute for Artificial IntelligenceProudly built by AI2 with the help of our Collaborators using these Sources.Terms of Service\u2022Privacy Policy.By clicking accept or continuing to use the site, you agree to the terms outlined in our Privacy Policy, Terms of Service, and Dataset LicenseACCEPT & CONTINUE", "Changing permafrost in a warming world and feedbacks to the Earth system - IOPscience This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this site you agree to our use of cookies. To find out more, see our Privacy and Cookies policy. Close this notification NOTICE: We are currently carrying out some scheduled maintenance during which time there may be some performance issues on IOPscience. We apologise for any inconvenience caused. Accessibility Links Skip to content Skip to search IOPscience Skip to Journals list Accessibility help IOP Science home Skip to content Accessibility Help Journals Journals list Browse more than 70 science journal titles Subject collections Read the very best research published in IOP journals IOPcorporate IOP for R&DScience fueling innovation IOPselect Articles from the past year selected by our editors Publishing partners Partner organisations and publications Open access IOP Publishing open access policy guide Review articles The latest review articles from our journals IOP Conference Series Read open access proceedings from science conferences worldwide Books Publishing Support Login Reset your password If you have a user account, you will need to reset your password the next time you login. You will only need to do this once. Find out more.IOPscience login / Sign Up Please note: You do not need to reset your password if you login via Athens or an Institutional login.Athens / Institution login Primary search Search Article Lookup Find article List of journal titles: 2D Mater. (2014 - present) Acta Phys. Sin. (Overseas Edn) (1992 - 1999) Adv. Nat. Sci: Nanosci. Nanotechnol. (2010 - present) Appl. Phys. Express (2008 - present) Biofabrication (2009 - present) Bioinspir. Biomim. (2006 - present) Biomed. Mater. (2006 - present) Biomed. Phys. Eng. Express (2015 - present) Br. J. Appl. Phys. (1950 - 1967) Chin. J. Astron. Astrophys. (2001 - 2008) Chin. J. Chem. Phys. (1987 - 2007) Chin. J. Chem. Phys. (2008 - 2012) Chinese Phys. (2000 - 2007) Chinese Phys. B (2008 - present) Chinese Phys. C (2008 - present) Chinese Phys. Lett. (1984 - present) Class. Quantum Grav. (1984 - present) Clin. Phys. Physiol. Meas. (1980 - 1992) Commun. Theor. Phys. (1982 - present) Comput. Sci. Disc. (2008 - 2015) Converg. Sci. Phys. Oncol. (2015 - present) Distrib. Syst. Engng. (1993 - 1999) EPL (1986 - present) Electron. Struct. (2019 - present) Eng. Res. Express (2019 - present) Environ. Res. Commun. (2018 - present) Environ. Res. Lett. (2006 - present) Eur. J. Phys. (1980 - present) Flex. Print. Electron. (2015 - present) Fluid Dyn. Res. (1986 - present) Funct. Compos. Struct. (2018 - present) IOP Conf. Ser.: Earth Environ. Sci. (2008 - present) IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng. (2009 - present) Int. J. Extrem. Manuf. (2019 - present) Inverse Problems (1985 - present) Izv. Math. (1995 - present) J. Breath Res. (2007 - present) J. Cosmol. Astropart. Phys. (2003 - present) J. Geophys. Eng. (2004 - 2018) J. High Energy Phys. (1997 - 2009) J. Inst. (2006 - present) J. Micromech. Microeng. (1991 - present) J. Neural Eng. (2004 - present) J. Nucl. Energy, Part C Plasma Phys. (1959 - 1966) J. Opt. (1977 - 1998) J. Opt. (2010 - present) J. Opt. A: Pure Appl. Opt. (1999 - 2009) J. Opt. B: Quantum Semiclass. Opt. (1999 - 2005) J. Phys. A: Gen. Phys. (1968 - 1972) J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. (1975 - 2006) J. Phys. A: Math. Nucl. Gen. (1973 - 1974) J. Phys. A: Math. Theor. (2007 - present) J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Opt. Phys. (1988 - present) J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Phys. (1968 - 1987) J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. (1968 - 1988) J. Phys. Commun. (2017 - present) J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. (1968 - present) J. Phys. E: Sci. Instrum. (1968 - 1989) J. Phys. Energy (2018 - present) J. Phys. F: Met. Phys. (1971 - 1988) J. Phys. G: Nucl. Part. Phys. (1989 - present) J. Phys. G: Nucl. Phys. (1975 - 1988) J. Phys. Mater. (2018 - present) J. Phys. Photonics (2018 - present) J. Phys.: Condens. Matter (1989 - present) J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. (2004 - present) J. Radiol. Prot. (1988 - present) J. Sci. Instrum. (1923 - 1967) J. Semicond. (2009 - present) J. Soc. Radiol. Prot. (1981 - 1987) J. Stat. Mech. (2004 - present) Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. (1962 - present) Laser Phys. (2013 - present) Laser Phys. Lett. (2004 - present) Mater. Res. Express (2014 - present) Math. USSR Izv. (1967 - 1992) Math. USSR Sb. (1967 - 1993) Meas. Sci. Technol. (1990 - present) Methods Appl. Fluoresc. (2013 - present) Metrologia (1965 - present) Modelling Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng. (1992 - present) Multifunct. Mater. (2018 - present) Nano Futures (2017 - present) Nanotechnology (1990 - present) New J. Phys. (1998 - present) Nonlinearity (1988 - present) Nouvelle Revue d'Optique (1973 - 1976) Nouvelle Revue d'Optique Appliqu\u00e9e (1970 - 1972) Nucl. Fusion (1960 - present) PASP (1889 - present) Phys. Biol. (2004 - present) Phys. Bull. (1950 - 1988) Phys. Educ. (1966 - present) Phys. Med. Biol. (1956 - present) Phys. Scr. (1970 - present) Phys. World (1988 - present) Phys.-Usp. (1993 - present) Physics in Technology (1973 - 1988) Physiol. Meas. (1993 - present) Plasma Phys. (1967 - 1983) Plasma Phys. Control. Fusion (1984 - present) Plasma Res. Express (2018 - present) Plasma Sci. Technol. (1999 - present) Plasma Sources Sci. Technol. (1992 - present) Proc. Phys. Soc. (1926 - 1948) Proc. Phys. Soc. (1958 - 1967) Proc. Phys. Soc. A (1949 - 1957) Proc. Phys. Soc. B (1949 - 1957) Proc. Phys. Soc. London (1874 - 1925) Prog. Biomed. Eng. (2018 - present) Prog. Energy (2018 - present) Pure Appl. Opt. (1992 - 1998) Quantum Electron. (1993 - present) Quantum Opt. (1989 - 1994) Quantum Sci. Technol. (2015 - present) Quantum Semiclass. Opt. (1995 - 1998) Rep. Prog. Phys. (1934 - present) Res. Astron. Astrophys. (2009 - present) Research Notes of the AAS (2017 - present) Review of Physics in Technology (1970 - 1972) Russ. Acad. Sci. Sb. Math. (1993 - 1995) Russ. Chem. Rev. (1960 - present) Russ. Math. Surv. (1960 - present) Russian Acad. Sci. Izv. Math. (1993 - 1995) Sb. Math. (1995 - present) Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater. (2000 - 2015) Semicond. Sci. Technol. (1986 - present) Smart Mater. Struct. (1992 - present) Sov. J. Quantum Electron. (1971 - 1992) Sov. Phys. Usp. (1958 - 1992) Supercond. Sci. Technol. (1988 - present) Surf. Topogr.: Metrol. Prop. (2013 - present) The Astronomical Journal (1849 - present) The Astrophysical Journal (1996 - present) The Astrophysical Journal Letters (1995 - 2009) The Astrophysical Journal Letters (2010 - present) The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series (1996 - present) Trans. Opt. Soc. (1899 - 1932) Transl. Mater. Res. (2014 - present) Volume number: Issue number (if known): Article or page number: Environmental Research Letters Editorial \u2022 The following article is OPEN ACCESS Changing permafrost in a warming world and feedbacks to the Earth system Guido Grosse1, Scott Goetz2, A Dave McGuire3, Vladimir E Romanovsky4 and Edward A G Schuur5 Published 30 March 2016 \u2022 \u00a9 2016 IOP Publishing Ltd Environmental Research Letters, Volume 11, Number 4 Focus on Changing Permafrost in a Warming World: Observation and Implication Download Article PDF Figures Tables References 9641 Total downloads Turn off MathJax Turn on MathJax Share this article Article information Author affiliations1 Alfred Wegener Institute Helmholtz Centre for Polar and Marine Research, Potsdam, Germany2 Woods Hole Research Center, Woods Hole, USA3 U.S. Geological Survey, Alaska Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, University of Alaska Fairbanks, Fairbanks, USA4 Geophysical Institute, University of Alaska Fairbanks, Fairbanks, USA5 Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, USA Dates Published 30 March 2016 Peer review information Revisions:\u00a00 Screened for originality? No Citation Guido Grosse et al 2016 Environ. Res. Lett. 11 040201 Create citation alert DOI https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/11/4/040201 View accepted manuscript Buy this article in print Journal RSS feed Sign up for new issue notifications 1748-9326/11/4/040201 Abstract The permafrost component of the cryosphere is changing dramatically, but the permafrost region is not well monitored and the consequences of change are not well understood. Changing permafrost interacts with ecosystems and climate on various spatial and temporal scales. The feedbacks resulting from these interactions range from local impacts on topography, hydrology, and biology to complex influences on global scale biogeochemical cycling. This review contributes to this focus issue by synthesizing its 28 multidisciplinary studies which provide field evidence, remote sensing observations, and modeling results on various scales. We synthesize study results from a diverse range of permafrost landscapes and ecosystems by reporting key observations and modeling outcomes for permafrost thaw dynamics, identifying feedbacks between permafrost and ecosystem processes, and highlighting biogeochemical feedbacks from permafrost thaw. We complete our synthesis by discussing the progress made, stressing remaining challenges and knowledge gaps, and providing an outlook on future needs and research opportunities in the study of permafrost\u2013ecosystem\u2013climate interactions. Export citation and abstract BibTeX RIS Original content from this work may be used under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 licence. Any further distribution of this work must maintain attribution to the author(s) and the title of the work, journal citation and DOI. 1.\u00a0IntroductionPermafrost regions, which cover about a quarter of the Northern Hemisphere land surface (Zhang et al 1999), are characterized by a mosaic of ecosystems shaped by very diverse landscapes and climate histories. Permafrost, defined by sub-zero ground temperatures for at least two consecutive years, consists of a highly diverse range of substrates with different geological backgrounds and depositional histories. In addition, observed and projected climate change is not uniform throughout the permafrost region and may result in the crossing of permafrost stability thresholds in high latitude ecosystems (Grosse et al 2011, Hinzman et al 2013). The combination of these complex permafrost-ecosystem-climate factors and interactions in a warming world will cause a broad range of successional trajectories in northern permafrost regions and affect the overall feedbacks and impacts of permafrost changes to the Earth system. While many of these impacts will be of predominantly local or regional nature, such as changing hydrology, vegetation, and topography, some may have far-reaching implications. In particular, the substantial frozen soil organic carbon pool in permafrost regions may cause climate impacts on global scales upon thaw and mobilization (Schuur et al 2015).In recognition of this importance, permafrost has been added as an Essential Climate Variable (ECV) in the Global Climate Observing System (GCOS) of the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), which requires broad-scale research and systematic observations to support the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC) in their assessments of the state of the global climate system and its variability. In addition, the United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP) has supported the publication of a report highlighting the potential role of permafrost as a climate-shaping factor in a warming Arctic (Schaefer et al 2012).A better understanding is required for permafrost characteristics, aspects of permafrost landscape dynamics, and the feedbacks from changing permafrost that may act on local to global scales. It is important to use multi-disciplinary approaches on various scales and across research themes to develop a more complete understanding of ecosystem interactions in permafrost regions. This focus issue brings together 28 studies from a total of 129 individual authors covering diverse thematic perspectives on permafrost interactions with the Earth system. The studies envelop a wide range of spatial and temporal scales and they include field investigations, remote sensing approaches, and numerical modeling (table 1). The studies cover many of the important permafrost regions (Alaska, Canada, Northeast Siberia, and Antarctica) and settings and demonstrate the breadth of environmental diversity, as well as research approaches, in permafrost regions (figure 1). By bringing these studies together, this focus issue also offers insights into the complexity of environmental dynamics in permafrost regions and remaining knowledge gaps. The aim of our synthesis is to provide an overview of the studies in this focus issue and to place their findings in a broader context of permafrost\u2013ecosystem\u2013climate dynamics. Our overview is organized into three sections that focus on studies that were primarily relevant to (1) observations and modeling of permafrost thaw dynamics, (2) feedbacks between permafrost and ecosystem processes, and (3) biogeochemical feedbacks to the climate system from permafrost thaw. We then discuss the key collective advances made in each of these areas by the studies in this focus issue. Finally, we conclude by providing insights on remaining challenges ahead as well as an outlook on promising new approaches for regional scale assessments of how permafrost distribution and permafrost change affect ecosystem dynamics.Table 1. Research emphasis of all 28 studies within the focus issue on permafrost. # Study Spatial scalea Temporal scaleb Field study Remote sensing Numerical modeling Main science fieldsc 1 Belshe et al (2013) L SN X X GEO, SOIL 2 Gao et al (2013) G D X BGC 3 Genet et al (2013) R D X GEO, SOIL 4 Godin et al (2014) L A, D X X HYD, GEO 5 Guglielmin et al (2014) L A X GEO, BIO 6 Hayes et al (2014) G S, D X BGC 7 Jafarov et al (2013) L S, D X GEO, SOIL 8 James et al (2013) R D X GEO 9 Jensen et al (2014) L S, A X GEO, SOIL, BGC 10 Johansson et al (2013) L A X GEO, SOIL, BIO 11 Johnson et al (2013) R SN X SOIL 12 Jones et al (2013) R A X X GEO 13 Jorgenson et al (2013) R SN, D X GEO, HYD, SOIL, BIO 14 Lamoureux and Lafreni\u00e8re (2014) R S X HYD, BGC 15 Laurion and Mladenov (2013) L S X HYD, BGC 16 Leffler and Welker (2013) L S, A X HYD, BGC 17 Marmy et al (2013) L S, D X GEO 18 McConnell et al (2013) L S X SOIL, BIO, BGC 19 Mishra et al (2013) G SN X SOIL 20 Necsoiu et al (2013) R D X HYD, GEO 21 Nossov et al (2013) R SN, S X SOIL, BIO, GEO 22 Olefeldt et al (2014) R SN X HYD, BGC 23 Pizano et al (2014) R D X BGC, SOIL, BIO 24 Schaefer et al (2014) G SN, D X BGC, POL 25 Tape et al (2013) R D X X HYD, SOIL, BIO 26 Vonk et al (2013) L SN, S X HYD, BGC 27 Williams et al (2013) L S, D X X X GEO, HYD, POL 28 Zhu et al (2013) G D X BGC Total 12\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0L 8\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0SN 18 6 10 14\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0GEO, 12\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0SOIL 11\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0R 11\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0S 10\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0HYD, 7\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0BIO 5\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0G 6\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0A 12\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0BGC, 2\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0POL 14\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0D aL\u2014local, R\u2014regional, G\u2014Panarctic/global. bSN\u2014snapshot, S\u2014seasonal, A\u2014multi-annual, D\u2014multi-decadal. cGEO\u2014geophysics and geomorphology, SOIL\u2014soil sciences, HYD\u2014hydrology, BIO\u2014biology, BGC\u2014biogeochemistry, POL\u2013policy. Zoom In Zoom Out Reset image size Figure 1.\u00a0Study sites and regions covered by contributions in this focus issue. Permafrost distribution based on Brown et al (1997) and ecoregion distribution adapted from The Nature Conservancy (2009). Site numbers refer to table 1.Download figure: Standard image High-resolution image Export PowerPoint slide 2.\u00a0Observations and modeling of permafrost thaw dynamicsPermafrost thaw has been observed in most permafrost regions across the globe and various processes have been identified that play an important role, including gradual top-down thaw and active layer deepening, thermokarst and talik formation, and thermo-erosion (Romanovsky et al 2010, Jorgenson 2013). In this focus issue, several studies focused on permafrost degradation and its direct consequences for terrain surface and hydrology. Jones et al (2013) used multi-temporal Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) elevation models to calculate surface deformation between 2006 and 2010 in a coastal lowland stretch along the Alaska Beaufort Sea. For the 100 km2 study area they find significant change (>0.55 m vertical change) in 0.3% of the study area over the 4 year period. The change was mainly associated with eroding coastal, lake, and river bluffs, as well as thawing ice wedges and erosion gullies. Also relying on remote sensing data in combination with field studies, Godin et al (2014) investigated the development of a thermo-erosional gully network on Bylot Island, Nunavut (Canada) in fine detail over the 1972\u20132013 period. The observed erosion rates were as high as 90 m yr\u22121 or 2900 m2 yr\u22121 (1999\u20132007 interval), with significant impacts on local hydrology such as changes in channel configuration, flow rates, and increased hydrological connectivity. A single gully in their study region mobilized about 32 000 m3 soil volume over the 1999\u20132013 period. Necsoiu et al (2013) used remote sensing and analyzed a time series of aerial and Quickbird satellite images from 1951\u20132005 to detect thermokarst lake changes and transition of low center polygons to high center polygons due to ice wedge degradation in the Kobuk Valley National Park in NW Alaska. In a study for the Fort Simpson region, Northwest Territories in Canada, Williams et al (2013) analyzed LiDAR digital elevation data and field data to quantify the distribution of linear disturbance features that developed from ground subsidence following geophysical exploration activities in the 1960s and 1980s. They find significantly decreased surface elevations and increased thaw depths and soil moisture in the disturbed zones, affecting hydrological flow direction. Combining mechanical probing, ground temperature monitoring, boreholes, and geophysical surveys, James et al (2013) revisited a 1964 survey of permafrost distribution along the southern boundary of permafrost distribution in the Alaska Highway corridor of NW Canada. They find that about half of the 55 sites have lost permafrost over about 40 years, while sites with remaining warm permafrost are generally found in areas with peat or thick organic mats.One modeling study analyzed the thermal dynamics of permafrost in different settings of mountainous regions. Marmy et al (2013) used a permafrost process model and conducted climate-driven sensitivity analyses to test the impacts of seasonal and long-term changes in air temperature and precipitation on a low ice-content permafrost site in the Swiss Alps typical for high mountain permafrost regions. They suggest that autumn changes have the largest thermal effects on permafrost conditions and that snow cover duration and timing are key factors for variability. The observations and modeling results reported in these studies indicate that permafrost thaw is occurring under a range of environmental conditions and disturbance regimes, and collectively these studies indicate that the potential for widespread permafrost retreat is likely under further climate warming and accelerating rates and severity of disturbances. 3.\u00a0Feedbacks between permafrost and ecosystem processesThe rate of permafrost thaw depends on interactions between permafrost and ecosystem processes. Several papers in this focus issue examined feedbacks between permafrost and ecosystem structure and how disturbance alters those interactions. Johnson et al (2013) analyzed variability in permafrost occurrence and organic layer thickness (OLT) using more than 3000 soil pedons across a mean annual temperature (MAT) gradient in Alaska. The probability of observing permafrost was 32% higher for every 10 cm OLT increase in shallow OLT soils (<28 cm) due to the summer insulation effect of OLT. In deeper OLT soils, the probability of observing permafrost was 6% lower for every 10 cm increase because deeper OLT was more likely to occur in wetlands where the higher thermal conductivity of water may lead to permafrost degradation. Furthermore, across the MAT gradient, the probability of permafrost in sandy soils varied little, but the probability of permafrost in loamy and silty soils decreased substantially from cooler to warmer temperatures.To address the complexity of how interactions between permafrost histories and successional changes after disturbance (fire and thermokarst) influence ecosystem dynamics in boreal regions, Jorgenson et al (2013) used a chronosequence approach to assess changes in vegetation composition, water storage and soil organic carbon (SOC) stocks along successional gradients within four landscapes. The study found that permafrost thaw led to the reorganization of vegetation, water storage and flow paths, and patterns of SOC accumulation. However, changes have occurred over different timescales among landscapes: over decades in rocky uplands and gravelly\u2013sandy lowlands in response to fire and lake drainage, over decades to centuries in peaty\u2013silty lowlands with a legacy of complicated Holocene landscape changes, and over centuries in silty uplands where ice-rich soil and ecological recovery protect permafrost.Nossov et al (2013) offer a detailed assessment of the factors that affect permafrost degradation after wildfire by comparing vegetation composition and soil properties between recently burned and unburned sites across three soil landscapes (rocky uplands, silty uplands, and sandy lowlands) situated within the Yukon Flats and Yukon-Tanana Uplands in interior Alaska. The study found that degradation of the upper permafrost occurred at all burned sites, but differences in soil texture and moisture among soil landscapes allowed permafrost to persist beneath the active layer in the silty uplands, whereas a talik of unknown depth developed in the rocky uplands and a thin talik developed in the sandy lowlands. These results have implications for the stability of permafrost after fire. To understand the vulnerability of permafrost in silty uplands and lowlands to fire severity and future climate change, Jafarov et al (2013) modeled the impact of fire disturbance on boreal permafrost with black spruce forests in silty uplands and lowlands of interior Alaska. The comparison of lowland sites with thicker organic layers versus upland sites with thinner organic layers showed that, depending on burn severity, permafrost in upland sites is significantly more vulnerable to loss, while permafrost in lowland sites may persist even under climate warming. For instance, their study suggests that an 18 m thick upland permafrost column may thaw within 120 years under current climate. Genet et al (2013) developed a modeling approach to estimate how warming and fire regime may influence spatial and temporal changes in active layer and carbon dynamics across a boreal forest landscape in interior Alaska. To address this question, they (1) developed and tested a predictive model of the effect of fire severity on soil organic horizons that depends on landscape-level conditions and (2) used this model to evaluate the long-term consequences of warming and changes in fire regime on active layer and soil carbon dynamics of black spruce forests across interior Alaska. Similar to Jafarov et al (2013), Genet et al (2013) concluded that lowlands were more resistant to severe fires and climate warming, showing smaller increases in active layer thickness and soil carbon loss compared to drier flat uplands and slopes.Tape et al (2013) investigated the impacts of vegetation and geomorphological changes in a coastal permafrost lowland along the Alaska Beaufort Sea using aerial image time series from 1948\u20132010. The authors found that decadal-scale permafrost thaw subsidence led to a shift from non-saline vegetation to salt-tolerant vegetation communities due to enhanced inundation from the sea, thereby altering the distribution of goose habitat. Belshe et al (2013) used high resolution Ikonos remote sensing images to investigate how linear thermokarst features affected vegetation and organic layer thickness in an upland setting with ice-rich permafrost in interior Alaska. Their image and elevation model-based land cover classification together with field data analysis revealed that 12% of the landscape is already affected by thermokarst in the study region. Both thaw depth and organic layer thickness were significantly larger in the thermokarst-dominated land cover categories. In a manipulation experiment, Johansson et al (2013) investigated how artificially increased snow cover impacts permafrost peat plateaus in northern Sweden. Following a multi-annual snow thickness manipulation, the mean winter ground temperatures increased by 1.5 \u00b0C in the plots with thicker snow, while minimum winter temperatures were even up to 9 \u00b0C higher. As a result active layers increased and graminoid vegetation types expanded in the manipulated plots, changing vegetation composition, structure, and phenology cycle, highlighting the role of snow cover properties for both permafrost conditions and ecosystem characteristics.While all other studies in this focus issue target northern hemisphere permafrost regions, Guglielmin et al (2014) provided rare but valuable insights into permafrost changes in continental Antarctica. They reported active layer increases of 0.3 cm yr\u22121 since field monitoring started in 2000 at their study sites in Victoria Land, with impacts on soil moisture conditions and on the generally sparse vegetation layer of mosses and lichen. 4.\u00a0Biogeochemical feedbacks to the climate system from permafrost thawIn this section, we review both field-based and modeling studies that specifically focused on evaluating the effects permafrost thaw on biogeochemical feedbacks to the climate system. An analysis of 18 sites disturbed by retrogressive thaw slumps in the Arctic foothills of Alaska indicated that carbon (3 kg m\u22122) and nitrogen (0.2 kg m\u22122) pools were displaced from the soil organic layer during the disturbance but also that the disturbance did not change the pools of the upper 15 cm of mineral layer (Pizano et al 2014). At recovered sites, the soil carbon pools re-accumulated rapidly (32+/\u221210 g C m\u22122 yr) within 60 years after the disturbance had ceased and succession started. Overall, the recovery of the observed thaw slump disturbances resulted in vegetation succession shifting from graminoid communities to tall deciduous shrubs that in turn likely increased primary productivity, biomass accumulation, and nutrient cycling. Jensen et al (2014) also studied the impacts of retrogressive thaw slumps on carbon cycling. By investigating a chronosequence of thaw slumps in Northwest Alaska they found that peak growing season soil CO2 fluxes from active slumps were consistently less than half (1.8 and 0.9 g CO2-C m\u22122 d\u22121 in 2011 and 2012, respectively) compared to undisturbed or stabilized thaw slumps (5.2 and 3.2 g CO2-C m\u22122 d\u22121 in 2011 and 2012, respectively). Interestingly, environmental factors such as soil temperature and moisture did not exert strong control on the CO2 efflux. The authors suggested that low organic matter content in the slumped material, lack of stable vegetation, and larger increases in bulk densities in the upper slump sediments may be a limiting factor to CO2 efflux.McConnell et al (2013) predicted that wetland vegetation communities with permafrost would have reduced ecosystem respiration (ER) but greater temperature sensitivity than communities without permafrost. These predictions were partially supported. The results of the study suggest that ER across a permafrost/wetland gradient was temperature-limited, until conditions became so wet that respiration became oxygen-limited and influenced less by temperature. But even in sites with similar hydrology and thaw depth, ER varied significantly likely based on factors such as soil redox status and vegetation composition.In a study of feedbacks from changing winter precipitation on vegetation biochemistry in permafrost regions, Leffler and Welker (2013) reported impacts of a changed snow regime on plant biochemistry at a snow fence site over continuous permafrost in High Arctic Northwest Greenland. They found that vegetation affected by enhanced snow conditions for 10 years featured higher leaf nitrogen, photosynthetic rate, and more enriched leaf \u03b415N. This local-scale study may represent an interesting perspective on changing snow-vegetation-biochemistry feedbacks in permafrost regions since thawing permafrost is often related to geomorphic change causing alteration of snow regimes due to thaw subsidence.Another study investigated the impacts of slope permafrost disturbances on changes in particulate organic carbon (POC) fluxes from low-order coastal watersheds in the continuous permafrost of Melville Island in the Canadian High Arctic (Lamoureux and Lafreni\u00e8re 2014). Radiocarbon analysis of the POC suggested that fresh disturbances delivered old POC to the aquatic system and that localized disturbances had a measurable impact on POC age downstream. In addition, POC from such disturbances dominated total POC (up to 78%) during summer baseflow. The findings suggest that POC sources and pathways need to be considered when scaling carbon fluxes across large watersheds affected by disturbances. Following a 900 km long transect crossing from non-permafrost into the discontinuous permafrost zone of western Canada, Olefeldt et al (2014) sampled dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and dissolved organic matter (DOM) concentrations in 65 streams with different permafrost and peatland characteristics in their catchments. The study demonstrated that DOC concentration and DOM chemical composition, and thus biogeochemical cycling in hydrological systems, were significantly influenced by presence or absence of peatlands and permafrost in the river catchments. In particular, DOC concentrations increased with catchment peatland cover but were found to be consistently lower in the permafrost zone. Laurion and Mladenov (2013) in turn looked at how sunlight impacts DOM in thaw ponds by photodegradation. Sampling of ponds was performed over a 12-day summer period in the continuous permafrost region of Bylot Island, High Arctic Canada, to study changes in DOM characteristics over time. Color and fluorescence decayed relatively fast at the pond surface, in particular for humic-like components, but only insignificant losses of DOC occurred over the observation period. Direct DOM mineralization through photochemical production of CO2 was minor compared to the photochemical transformation of DOM into less chromophoric and likely more labile molecules. DOM photolysis was considered a catalytic mechanism that can accelerate microbial turnover of DOM in thaw ponds. Melt of massive ice wedges in Yedoma deposits in Northeast Siberia were found to enhance degradation of organic carbon from Yedoma in experimental incubation assays where increasing amounts of ice wedge melt water were added to thawed Yedoma sediment (Vonk et al 2013). In these experiments, DOM from ice wedge meltwater enhanced the biolability of Yedoma DOM over time. The enhanced loss of DOM was attributed to the presence of low-molecular weight compounds and low initial phenolic content in the organic matter enclosed in ice wedge ice, thereby providing a readily available substrate promoting degradation of Yedoma organic carbon. This inoculation effect of ice wedge-bound organic matter for overall decomposition rates underlines the important role of ice wedge-rich Yedoma deposits for a positive permafrost-carbon feedback.Several studies have used modeling as a tool to make progress towards quantifying the magnitude and timing of biogeochemical feedbacks from permafrost thaw to the climate system across large spatial scales. Mishra et al (2013) noted that substantial differences exist between empirical and modeling estimates of the quantity and distribution of permafrost-region soil organic carbon, and that reducing these uncertainties is important to making better predictions of carbon\u2013climate feedbacks under future warming. The study identifies research challenges that constrain current assessments of the distribution and potential decomposability of soil OC stocks in the northern permafrost region and suggest priorities for future empirical and modeling studies to address these challenges. Several modeling studies in this focus issue have attempted to address these research challenges. In a retrospective analysis, Hayes et al (2014) employed a process-based model simulation experiment to assess the net effect of active layer dynamics on the 'permafrost carbon feedback' from 1970 to 2006 over the circumpolar domain of continuous and discontinuous permafrost. These experiments indicate that the mobilization of previously frozen carbon resulted in an estimated cumulative net source of 3.7 Pg C to the atmosphere since 1970 and was directly tied to active layer dynamics. Three studies used modeling approaches to evaluate the permafrost carbon feedback to the climate system in the 21st Century and beyond. Using an integrated Earth-system model framework, Zhu et al (2013) used a coupled hydrology\u2013biogeochemistry model to make estimates of these carbon exchanges with two contrasting climate change scenarios (no-policy versus policy) over the 21st century, by considering detailed water table dynamics and permafrost-thawing effects. Thawing permafrost has a small effect on the greenhouse gas sink under the policy scenario; however, under the no-policy scenario, about two thirds of the accumulated greenhouse gas sink over the 21st century has been offset by the carbon losses as CH4 and CO2 from thawing permafrost. Over the century, nearly all CO2-induced greenhouse sink through photosynthesis has been undone by CH4-induced greenhouse gas source. Gao et al (2013) examined the degradation of near-surface permafrost, the temporal dynamics of inundation (lakes and wetlands) induced by hydro-climatic change, subsequent methane emission, and potential climate feedbacks. The result of this model application indicates that additional warming, across the range of climate policy and uncertainties in the climate-system response, would be no greater than 0.1 \u00b0C by 2100. However, there is much uncertainty among the magnitude of the permafrost climate feedback simulated by the different models that have been used for this purpose. Schaefer et al (2014) conducted a synthetic analysis to evaluate this uncertainty and found that under a no policy scenario (representative concentration pathway 8.5) the permafrost carbon feedback would result in 0.29+/\u22120.21 \u00b0C additional warming. However, under a policy scenario consistent with representative concentration pathway 4.5, they found that the permafrost carbon feedback would result in 0.1+/\u22120.05 \u00b0C additional warming. An important result from this synthesis is that any substantial warming results in long-term carbon release from thawing permafrost as 60% of emissions would occur after 2100. 5.\u00a0DiscussionMany studies, including those in this focus issue, demonstrate with observations and data that in a warming world permafrost is currently changing and, in some cases, rapidly. While permafrost landscapes have always been dynamic and continuously affected by aggradation and degradation of frozen ground, the amplification of natural and anthropogenic stressors due to anthropogenic warming and increased economic usage of these regions results in increased disturbance frequencies and magnitudes. The intensification of disturbance impacts leads to substantial permafrost retreat and a multitude of associated physical, ecological and biogeochemical feedbacks. Consequences of widespread permafrost thaw often are irreversible on human time scales and may impact the character of ecosystems, hydrology, and carbon cycling for centuries to millennia.The physical processes that may be associated with permafrost degradation can be diverse including permafrost warming, phase transition from ice to water and increase in liquid pore water availability, volume loss due to melting ground ice and thaw subsidence (thermokarst), and loss of substrate stability and various forms of erosion. Hence, observations of permafrost thaw may focus on different approaches such as ground-based measurements of multi-annual increases in ground temperature, mechanical probing of long-term active layer or talik deepening, various types of geophysical surveys of permafrost conditions and permafrost extent and continuity, and geodetic surveys of long-term thaw subsidence or erosion. Approaches of observing permafrost thaw highlighted in this focus issue include for example quantitative surveys of thaw slumps, thermo-erosional gullies, ice wedge degradation, thaw subsidence, active layer deepening, and soil wetting as well as geophysical surveys of subsurface conditions. In addition, modeling on various scales was used to capture the impacts of disturbances on permafrost and resulting large-scale ecosystem feedbacks. Increasingly, remote sensing tools are used for observations of thaw subsidence, erosion, and even subsurface conditions and some studies in this focus issue use such tools to quantify changes in permafrost landscapes.The studies in this focus issue indicate that much progress has been made in better understanding key feedbacks between permafrost and ecosystem processes. The thickness of the organic layer controls the stability of permafrost (Johnson et al 2013), but disturbance can substantially alter the stability of permafrost through either the removal of the organic layer by fire or through inundation associated with thermokarst disturbance and subsequent subsidence that renders the organic layer less effective at insulating permafrost from warm summer air temperatures (Genet et al 2013, Jafarov et al 2013, Johnson et al 2013, Jorgenson et al 2013, Nossov et al 2013). The studies also indicate that the vulnerability of permafrost to disturbance depends on snow depth, which insulates permafrost from cold winter air temperatures, and on soil texture, as sandy soils generally have less ice content and are less likely to be inundated. The improved understanding of these interactions is leading to the development of landscape models of permafrost vulnerability to warming that can consider non-linear relationships between permafrost and ecosystem processes.Because of the importance of the carbon cycle for global climate, studies on biogeochemical feedbacks from permafrost thaw largely concentrate on repercussions to the carbon cycle through changes in permafrost soil carbon storage, the fate of DOC and DOM in hydrological systems, and changes in permafrost region greenhouse gas dynamics. Particular attention is being placed on the association of soil carbon stocks with specific permafrost-landscape-ecosystem settings, and on how the representation of these carbon pools may be enhanced in large scale models. Several of the studies in this issue highlight advances in these fields but also indicate that much remains to be learned about the characteristics (quantity, quality, and distribution) and dynamics of the permafrost soil carbon pool that is required to project future climate feedbacks and thus address climate policy implications. A key step taken here is the constraint of state-of-the-art models with enhanced, observation-driven carbon pool data (Koven et al 2015). In addition, recent studies for example have been able to implement thermokarst dynamics in permafrost carbon models to better understand how thermokarst lakes may contribute significantly to future atmospheric methane concentrations (Schneider von Deimling et al 2015). In future studies, the dynamics of soil nitrogen will also need to have a larger role to understand how interactions between changing permafrost and vegetation may impact above and below ground carbon pools (Harden et al 2012). 6.\u00a0Conclusions and outlookPermafrost and its dynamics are important components of the cryosphere as well as the Earth system as a whole. New insights into the ecosystem-climate feedbacks resulting from permafrost changes on local to global scales have significantly raised the awareness for this component of Earth's cryosphere in the view of stakeholders, decision makers, and the public over the last few years. The studies collected in this focus issue have contributed significant pieces of knowledge to the overall understanding of permafrost-ecosystem dynamics and form an important base for future work such as the impacts of thaw on ecosystem processes, biogeochemical cycling in permafrost-affected hydrological systems, and the modelling of climate feedbacks from permafrost change.Despite the strong progress made, significant challenges remain for the study of permafrost ecosystems, which are distributed across vast and remote high latitude regions with difficult access. Current permafrost data collection still focuses on limited areas across the ~23 million km2 northern hemisphere permafrost domain. A range of permafrost variables that determine permafrost vulnerability, such as ground ice content and distribution, are still poorly documented in the Arctic due to the difficulties associated with their local quantification and their scaling to larger regions. Though major steps have been taken in the quantification of soil organic carbon pools, other variables that determine climate feedbacks and impacts from permafrost changes in a warming world still need further assessments through mapping and data synthesis, in particular biogeochemical dynamics associated with carbon, nitrogen, and various nutrients or contaminants. For example, studies of carbon quality and availability are limited to a small number of specific settings that may not reflect the full variability of feedback dynamics across the large permafrost domain. At the same time, some permafrost-ecosystem feedbacks in a changing Arctic are incompletely understood, such as the importance of various disturbances regimes for widespread permafrost degradation, vegetation feedbacks with changes in the active layer thickness, and the interaction of geomorphic change due to permafrost thaw with hydrology and soil moisture regimes. An important factor in the outcome will be the different temporal dynamics of interacting processes and the presence or absence of gradual versus threshold-based changes.To improve understanding of the current and future changes in permafrost and permafrost-associated ecosystem dynamics across this large domain, a tighter coupling between field data collection and upscaling with remote sensing and modeling is necessary. The recent formalization of the Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost (GTN-P), with its two components on monitoring permafrost temperatures and the active layer, is an excellent first step towards enhanced data access and uniform data reporting for ground temperature records (Biskaborn et al 2015). Similar synthesis efforts increase the availability of panarctic datasets and strongly ease the use of such data by Earth System modelers and other scientific communities. An excellent example is the Northern Circumpolar Soil Carbon Database (NCSCD) (Hugelius et al 2013) which provides a synthesis of permafrost-region soil pedon and carbon data in the form of both vectorized and gridded datasets that can be readily incorporated into models. These databases have been expanded and accessibility enhanced through the work of the Permafrost Carbon Network (Schuur et al 2015; http://www.permafrostcarbon.org), which aims to use science synthesis to link empirical datasets at the panarctic scale to modeling efforts aimed at simulating future conditions. Database curation and expansion, as well as science synthesis, remain important tools for enabling networks of scientists that are creating new knowledge about this important region.The development of remote sensing datasets, tools, and techniques is accelerating and is leading to faster progress in permafrost research (NRC 2014, Westermann et al 2015a). Longer homogeneous time series of image data, new sensors systems, finer spatial and temporal resolutions, and easier and freer data access all have lead to the development of new innovative remote sensing products that are allowing the scientific community to make substantial progress in understanding and quantifying changes in permafrost landscapes (e.g., Fraser et al 2014, Jones et al 2015). Increasingly, direct implementation of remotely sensed, spatially homogeneous geophysical observations, along with ecosystem and land cover datasets across large regions into permafrost models is leading to improved spatio-temporal insights (Pastik et al 2015, Westermann et al 2015b). A further implementation of these approaches and the testing of new remote sensing techniques hold the promise of better quantification of future permafrost-climate feedbacks in the Earth system. Ongoing efforts like NASA's Arctic Boreal Vulnerability Experiment (ABoVE) (http://above.nasa.gov), ESA's GlobPermafrost (www.globpermafrost.info), DOE's Next-Generation Ecosystem Experiment (NGEE) Arctic (http://ngee-arctic.ornl.gov), and the permafrost research activities of Study of Environmental Arctic Change (SEARCH) (www.arcus.org/search-program/permafrost) will help to build upon the advances reported in this focus issue. Such broad and international research efforts are required to understand and project how permafrost-affected ecosystems, covering tens of millions of km2 or about a quarter of the northern landmass, will change in a warming Arctic and influence global climate in a rapidly changing Earth system. AcknowledgmentsWe thank the ERL editors for encouraging the setup of this focus issue on permafrost. GG was funded through NASA NNX08AJ37G and ERC 338335. ADM was funded by NSF and the US Geological Survey. SJG acknowledges support from NASA grants NNX15AU03A and NNX15AT71A. EAGS was supported by NSF Vulnerability of Permafrost Carbon Research Coordination Network Grant #955713, with continued support from the NSF Research, Synthesis, and Knowledge Transfer in a Changing Arctic: Science Support for SEARCH Grant #1331083. We thank C C Treat and D J Hayes for their constructive reviews. Any use of trade, firm, or product names is for descriptive purposes only and does not imply endorsement by the US Government. References Belshe E F, Schuur E A G and Grosse G 2013 Quantification of upland thermokarst features with high resolution remote sensing Environ. Res. Lett. 8 035016IOPscienceBiskaborn B K, Lanckman J P, Lantuit H, Elger K, Streletskiy D A, Cable W L and Romanovsky V E 2015 The new database of the global terrestrial network for permafrost (GTN-P) Earth System Science Data 7 245\u201359CrossrefBrown J, Ferrians O J, Heginbottom J A J and Melnikov E S 1997 Circum-arctic map of permafrost and ground ice conditions Map CP-45 (Reston, VA: US Geological Survey)Fraser R, Olthof I, Kokelj S, Lantz T, Lacelle D, Brooker A, Wolfe S and Schwarz S 2014 Detecting landscape changes in high latitude environments using landsat trend analysis: 1. Visualization Remote Sensing 6 11533\u201357CrossrefGao X, Schlosser C A, Sokolov A, Walter Anthony K, Zhuang Q and Kicklighter D 2013 Permafrost degradation and methane: low risk of biogeochemical climate-warming feedback Environ. Res. Lett. 8 035014IOPscienceGenet H et al 2013 Modeling the effects of fire severity and climate warming on active layer thickness and soil carbon storage of black spruce forests across the landscape in interior Alaska Environ. Res. Lett. 8 045016IOPscienceGodin E, Fortier D and Coulombe S 2014 Effects of thermo-erosion gullying on hydrologic flow networks, discharge and soil loss Environ. Res. Lett. 9 105010IOPscienceGrosse G et al 2011 Vulnerability of high latitude soil carbon in North America to disturbance J. Geophys. Res.\u2014Biogeosci. 116 G00K06CrossrefGuglielmin M, Dalle Fratte M and Cannone N 2014 Permafrost warming and vegetation changes in continental Antarctica Environ. Res. Lett. 9 045001IOPscienceHarden J W et al 2012 Field information links permafrost carbon to physical vulnerabilities of thawing Geophys. Res. Lett. 39 L15704CrossrefHayes D J, Kicklighter D W, McGuire A D, Chen M, Zhuang Q, Yuan F, Melillo J M and Wullschleger S D 2014 The impacts of recent permafrost thaw on land\u2013atmosphere greenhouse gas exchange Environ. Res. Lett. 9 045005IOPscienceHinzman L D, Deal C J, McGuire A D, Mernild S H, Polyakov I V and Walsh J E 2013 Trajectory of the Arctic as an integrated system Ecological Applications 23 1837\u201368CrossrefHugelius G et al 2013 A new data set for estimating organic carbon storage to 3 m depth in soils of the northern circumpolar permafrost region Earth System Science Data 5 393\u2013402CrossrefJafarov E E, Romanovsky V E, Genet H, McGuire A D and Marchenko S S 2013 The effects of fire on the thermal stability of permafrost in lowland and upland black spruce forests of interior Alaska in a changing climate Environ. Res. Lett. 8 035030IOPscienceJames M, Lewkowicz A G, Smith S L and Miceli C M 2013 Multi-decadal degradation and persistence of permafrost in the Alaska Highway corridor, northwest Canada Environ. Res. Lett. 8 045013IOPscienceJensen A E, Lohse K A, Crosby B T and Mora C I 2014 Variations in soil carbon dioxide efflux across a thaw slump chronosequence in northwestern Alaska Environ. Res. Lett. 9 025001IOPscienceJohansson M, Callaghan T V, Bosi\u00f6 J, &angst;kerman H J, Jackowicz-Korczynski M and Christensen T R 2013 Rapid responses of permafrost and vegetation to experimentally increased snow cover in sub-arctic Sweden Environ. Res. Lett. 8 035025IOPscienceJohnson K D, Harden J W, McGuire A D, Clark M, Yuan F and Finley A O 2013 Permafrost and organic layer interactions over a climate gradient in a discontinuous permafrost zone Environ. Res. Lett. 8 035028IOPscienceJones B M, Grosse G, Arp C D, Miller E, Liu L, Hayes D J and Larsen C F 2015 Recent Arctic tundra fire initiates widespread thermokarst development Sci. Rep. 5 15865CrossrefJones B M, Stoker J M, Gibbs A E, Grosse G, Romanovsky V E, Douglas T A, Kinsman N E M and Richmond B M 2013 Quantifying landscape change in an arctic coastal lowland using repeat airborne LiDAR Environ. Res. Lett. 8 045025IOPscienceJorgenson M T 2013 Thermokarst terrains Treatise on Geomorphology vol 8 (San Diego: Academic) pp 313\u201324CrossrefJorgenson M T et al 2013 Reorganization of vegetation, hydrology and soil carbon after permafrost degradation across heterogeneous boreal landscapes Environ. Res. Lett. 8 035017IOPscienceKoven C D et al 2015 A simplified, data-constrained approach to estimate the permafrost carbon\u2013climate feedback Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 373 20140423CrossrefLamoureux S F and Lafreni\u00e8re M J 2014 Seasonal fluxes and age of particulate organic carbon exported from Arctic catchments impacted by localized permafrost slope disturbances Environ. Res. Lett. 9 045002IOPscienceLaurion I and Mladenov N 2013 Dissolved organic matter photolysis in Canadian arctic thaw ponds Environ. Res. Lett. 8 035026IOPscienceLeffler A J and Welker J M 2013 Long-term increases in snow pack elevate leaf N and photosynthesis inSalix arctica: responses to a snow fence experiment in the High Arctic of NW Greenland Environ. Res. Lett. 8 025023IOPscienceMarmy A, Salzmann N, Scherler M and Hauck C 2013 Permafrost model sensitivity to seasonal climatic changes and extreme events in mountainous regions Environ. Res. Lett. 8 035048IOPscienceMcConnell N A, Turetsky M R, McGuire A D, Kane E S, Waldrop M P and Harden J W 2013 Controls on ecosystem and root respiration across a permafrost and wetland gradient in interior Alaska Environ. Res. Lett. 8 045029IOPscienceMishra U et al 2013 Empirical estimates to reduce modeling uncertainties of soil organic carbon in permafrost regions: a review of recent progress and remaining challenges Environ. Res. Lett. 8 035020IOPscienceNational Research Council 2014 Opportunities to Use Remote Sensing in Understanding Permafrost and Related Ecological Characteristics (Washington, DC: National Academies) 24 pNecsoiu M, Dinwiddie C L, Walter G R, Larsen A and Stothoff S A 2013 Multi-temporal image analysis of historical aerial photographs and recent satellite imagery reveals evolution of water body surface area and polygonal terrain morphology in Kobuk Valley National Park, Alaska Environ. Res. Lett. 8 025007IOPscienceNossov D R, Jorgenson M T, Kielland K and Kanevskiy M Z 2013 Edaphic and microclimatic controls over permafrost response to fire in interior Alaska Environ. Res. Lett. 8 035013IOPscienceOlefeldt D, Persson A and Turetsky M R 2014 Influence of the permafrost boundary on dissolved organic matter characteristics in rivers within the Boreal and Taiga plains of western Canada Environ. Res. Lett. 9 035005IOPsciencePastick N J, Jorgenson M T, Wylie B K, Nield S J, Johnson K D and Finley A O 2015 Distribution of near-surface permafrost in Alaska: estimates of present and future conditions Remote Sens. Environ. 168 301\u201315CrossrefPizano C, Bar\u00f3n A F, Schuur E A G, Crummer K G and Mack M C 2014 Effects of thermo-erosional disturbance on surface soil carbon and nitrogen dynamics in upland arctic tundra Environ. Res. Lett. 9 075006IOPscienceRomanovsky V E, Smith S L and Christiansen H H 2010 Permafrost thermal state in the polar Northern Hemisphere during the international polar year 2007\u20132009: a synthesis Permafrost Periglac. Process 21 106\u201316CrossrefSchaefer K, Lantuit H, Romanovsky V E and Schuur E A G 2012 Policy implications of warming permafrost United Nations Environment Programme Special Report , DEW/1621/NASchaefer K, Lantuit H, Romanovsky V E, Schuur E A G and Witt R 2014 The impact of the permafrost carbon feedback on global climate Environ. Res. Lett. 9 085003IOPscienceSchneider von Deimling T, Grosse G, Strauss J, Schirrmeister L, Morgenstern A, Schaphoff S, Meinshausen M and Boike J 2015 Observation-based modelling of permafrost carbon fluxes with accounting for deep carbon deposits and thermokarst activity Biogeosciences 12 3469\u201388CrossrefSchuur E A G et al 2015 Climate change and the permafrost carbon feedback Nature 520 171\u20139CrossrefTape K D, Flint P L, Meixell B W and Gaglioti B V 2013 Inundation, sedimentation, and subsidence creates goose habitat along the Arctic coast of Alaska Environ. Res. Lett. 8 045031IOPscienceThe Nature Conservancy 2009 Global ecoregions, major habitat types, biogeographical realms and the nature conservancy terrestrial Assessment Units (http://maps.tnc.org) (accessed 4 February 2016)Vonk J E, Mann P J, Dowdy K L, Davydova A, Davydov S P, Zimov N, Spencer R G M, Bulygina E B, Eglinton T I and Holmes R M 2013 Dissolved organic carbon loss from Yedoma permafrost amplified by ice wedge thaw Environ. Res. Lett. 8 035023IOPscienceWestermann S, Duguay C R, Grosse G and K\u00e4\u00e4b A 2015a Remote sensing of permafrost and frozen ground Remote Sensing of the Cryosphere (Chichester: Wiley) 307\u201344 ppWestermann S, \u00d8stby T I, Gisn\u00e5s K, Schuler T V and Etzelm\u00fcller B 2015b A ground temperature map of the North Atlantic permafrost region based on remote sensing and reanalysis data The Cryosphere 9 1303\u201319CrossrefWilliams T J, Quinton W L and Baltzer J L 2013 Linear disturbances on discontinuous permafrost: implications for thaw-induced changes to land cover and drainage patterns Environ. Res. Lett. 8 025006IOPscienceZhang T, Barry R G, Knowles K, Heginbottom J A and Brown J 1999 Statistics and characteristics of permafrost and ground-ice distribution in the Northern Hemisphere Polar Geography 23 132\u201354CrossrefZhu X, Zhuang Q, Gao X, Sokolov A and Schlosser C A 2013 Pan-Arctic land\u2013atmospheric fluxes of methane and carbon dioxide in response to climate change over the 21st century Environ. Res. Lett. 8 045003IOPscience Export references: BibTeX RIS Back to top 10.1088/1748-9326/11/4/040201 Related content brightrecruits.com jobs Sales and Marketing Engineer ICEoxford MSc Space Science and Engineering and MSc Space Risk and Disaster Reduction Imperial College London Vice Provost, Graduate and Postdoctoral Programs New York University Abu Dhabi (NYUAD) Post a job More jobs IOP Science home Journals Books About IOPscience Contact us Developing countries access IOP Publishing open access policy IOP Publishing home \u00a9 Copyright 2019 IOP Publishing Terms & conditions Disclaimer Privacy & cookie policy This site uses cookies. By continuing to use this site you agree to our use of cookies.", "Circumpolar distribution and carbon storage of thermokarst landscapes - Europe PMC Article - Europe PMC 1 Europe PMC requires Javascript to function effectively. Either your web browser doesn't support Javascript or it is currently turned off. In the latter case, please turn on Javascript support in your web browser and reload this page. \u03b2Beta Feedback Complete survey Sign in or create an account https://orcid.org https://plus.europepmc.org/emss/sub.cgi?page=logoff Europe PMC Menu About About Europe PMC Funders Joining Europe PMC Governance Roadmap Outreach Tools Tools overview ORCID article claiming Journal list Grant finder External links service RSS feeds SciLite annotations Annotations submission Service Developers Developer resources Articles RESTful API Grants RESTful API SOAP web service Annotations API OAI service Bulk downloads Help Help using Europe PMC Contact us Contact us Helpdesk Feedback Twitter Blog Tech blog \u03b2Explore the beta version Europe PMC plus Search worldwide, life-sciences literature Search Advanced Search E.g. \"breast cancer\" HER2 Smith J Recent Activity Export List Clipboard Export Thermokarst is the process whereby the thawing of ice-rich permafrost ground causes land subsidence, resulting in development of distinctive landforms. Accelerated thermokarst due to climate change will damage infrastructure, but also impact hydrology, ecology and biogeochemistry. Here, we present a circumpolar assessment of the distribution of thermokarst landscapes, defined as landscapes comprised of current thermokarst landforms and areas susceptible to future thermokarst development. At 3.6 \u00d7 106 km2, thermokarst landscapes are estimated to cover \u223c20% of the northern permafrost region, with approximately equal contributions from three landscape types where characteristic wetland, lake and hillslope thermokarst landforms occur. We estimate that approximately half of the below-ground organic carbon within the study region is stored in thermokarst landscapes. Our results highlight the importance of explicitly considering thermokarst when assessing impacts of climate change, including future landscape greenhouse gas emissions, and provide a means for assessing such impacts at the circumpolar scale. The snippet could not be located in the article text. This may be because the snippet appears in a figure legend, contains special characters or spans different sections of the article. Circumpolar distribution and carbon storage of thermokarst landscapes. (PMID:27725633 PMCID:PMC5062615) PMID:27725633 PMCID:PMC5062615 Full Text Citations Related Articles Data BioEntities External Links Nat Commun. 2016; 7: 13043. Published online 2016 Oct 11. doi:\u00a0 10.1038/ncomms13043PMCID: PMC5062615PMID: 27725633Circumpolar distribution and carbon storage of thermokarst landscapesD. Olefeldt,a,1,2 S. Goswami,3,4 G. Grosse,5 D. Hayes,6 G. Hugelius,7 P. Kuhry,7 A. D. McGuire,8 V. E. Romanovsky,9,10 A.B.K. Sannel,7 E.A.G. Schuur,11 and M. R. Turetsky2D. Olefeldt1Department of Renewable Resources, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, T6G 2H12Department of Integrative Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada, N1G 2W1Find articles by D. OlefeldtS. Goswami3Environmental Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831, USA4National Remote Sensing Centre, Indian Space Research Organization, Balanagar, Hyderabad 500037, IndiaFind articles by S. GoswamiG. Grosse5Alfred Wegener Institute, Helmholtz Centre for Polar and Marine Research, Telegrafenberg A45, Potsdam 14473, GermanyFind articles by G. GrosseD. Hayes6School of Forest Resources, University of Maine, Orono, Maine 04473, USAFind articles by D. HayesG. Hugelius7Department of Physical Geography, Stockholm University, Stockholm 106 91, SwedenFind articles by G. HugeliusP. Kuhry7Department of Physical Geography, Stockholm University, Stockholm 106 91, SwedenFind articles by P. KuhryA. D. McGuire8U.S. Geological Survey, Alaska Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, University of Alaska Fairbanks, Fairbanks, Alaska 99775, USAFind articles by A. D. McGuireV. E. Romanovsky9Geophysical Institute, University of Alaska Fairbanks, Fairbanks, Alaska 99775, USA10Tyumen State Oil and Gas University, Tyumen, Tyument. Oblast 625000, RussiaFind articles by V. E. RomanovskyA.B.K. Sannel7Department of Physical Geography, Stockholm University, Stockholm 106 91, SwedenFind articles by A.B.K. SannelE.A.G. Schuur11Center for Ecosystem Science and Society, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona 86011, USAFind articles by E.A.G. SchuurM. R. Turetsky2Department of Integrative Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada, N1G 2W1Find articles by M. R. Turetsky1Department of Renewable Resources, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, T6G 2H12Department of Integrative Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada, N1G 2W13Environmental Sciences Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831, USA4National Remote Sensing Centre, Indian Space Research Organization, Balanagar, Hyderabad 500037, India5Alfred Wegener Institute, Helmholtz Centre for Polar and Marine Research, Telegrafenberg A45, Potsdam 14473, Germany6School of Forest Resources, University of Maine, Orono, Maine 04473, USA7Department of Physical Geography, Stockholm University, Stockholm 106 91, Sweden8U.S. Geological Survey, Alaska Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, University of Alaska Fairbanks, Fairbanks, Alaska 99775, USA9Geophysical Institute, University of Alaska Fairbanks, Fairbanks, Alaska 99775, USA10Tyumen State Oil and Gas University, Tyumen, Tyument. Oblast 625000, Russia11Center for Ecosystem Science and Society, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona 86011, USAaEmail: ac.atreblau@tdlefeloAuthor information \u25ba Article notes \u25ba Copyright and License information \u25ba DisclaimerReceived 2015 Nov 3; Accepted 2016 Aug 26.Copyright \u00a9 2016, The Author(s)This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in the credit line; if the material is not included under the Creative Commons license, users will need to obtain permission from the license holder to reproduce the material. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/This article has been cited by other articles in PMC.AbstractThermokarst is the process whereby the thawing of ice-rich permafrost ground causes land subsidence, resulting in development of distinctive landforms. Accelerated thermokarst due to climate change will damage infrastructure, but also impact hydrology, ecology and biogeochemistry. Here, we present a circumpolar assessment of the distribution of thermokarst landscapes, defined as landscapes comprised of current thermokarst landforms and areas susceptible to future thermokarst development. At 3.6 \u00d7 106 km2, thermokarst landscapes are estimated to cover ~20% of the northern permafrost region, with approximately equal contributions from three landscape types where characteristic wetland, lake and hillslope thermokarst landforms occur. We estimate that approximately half of the below-ground organic carbon within the study region is stored in thermokarst landscapes. Our results highlight the importance of explicitly considering thermokarst when assessing impacts of climate change, including future landscape greenhouse gas emissions, and provide a means for assessing such impacts at the circumpolar scale.The northern circumpolar permafrost region stores ~1,000Pg soil organic carbon (SOC) in the upper 3m1, similar in magnitude to the atmospheric carbon storage. Permafrost thaw due to climate change can occur both through widespread but gradual deepening of the seasonally thawed soil layer (that is, active layer deepening), and through the development of thermokarst landforms, which occur at discrete landscape locations and often affect the entire soil profile2,3. Thermokarst initiation at discrete locations occurs due to interactions of hydrology, soil properties, vegetation, geomorphology and disturbances, but fundamentally depends on the presence of excess ground ice that causes characteristic land surface subsidence when thawed2,4,5. Active layer deepening and the development of various thermokarst landforms each cause characteristic changes to soil environmental conditions and thus influence both the potential for SOC erosion and in situ rates of SOC mineralization into carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4). Current estimates indicate that greenhouse gas emissions from thawing permafrost soils will represent a major terrestrial biogeochemical feedback to climate change over this century, potentially on the same order of magnitude as global deforestation3. However, this permafrost carbon feedback remains poorly constrained, partly due to major uncertainties related to the role of rapid permafrost thaw through thermokarst3,6.Thermokarst is generally not taken into account by the current generation of large-scale biogeochemical and earth system models for projecting future near-surface permafrost conditions7, SOC thaw8 and SOC mineralization into greenhouse gases9,10,11. This is despite a long history of field observations documenting thermokarst landform development at local scales4,5,12,13,14,15, and more recent local studies of post-thaw trajectories of carbon storage and greenhouse gas emissions16,17,18. The distribution of thermokarst landforms has been assessed at local and regional scales19,20,21,22,23, and a generalized map of permafrost hazard potential to human infrastructure is available at the circumpolar scale24. However, the inclusion of thermokarst in land surface and carbon cycle models has so far been in part hindered by the lack of a consistent circumpolar assessment of the distribution of thermokarst landscapes.Here, we present a framework for using available spatial information on landscape characteristics within the northern boreal and tundra permafrost region to assess the distribution of thermokarst landscapes. We estimate that thermokarst landscapes cover 20% of the northern permafrost region and store up to half its SOC. By providing information on the distribution and carbon storage of different types of thermokarst landscapes, we aim to enable explicit consideration of the influence of thermokarst on future carbon cycling at the circumpolar scale.ResultsAssessing the distribution of thermokarst landscapesThis study distinguishes between wetland, lake and hillslope thermokarst landscapes (Fig. 1). This distinction between different types of thermokarst landscapes is broad and it is recognized that a high degree of landscape diversity is retained within each type. Each thermokarst landscape type is defined by its association with a set of characteristic thermokarst landforms5 (see below). Characteristic thermokarst landforms of each thermokarst landscape preferentially co-occur spatially due to similarities in their dependencies on landscape characteristics for initiation and development. Nearly two dozen distinct thermokarst landforms have been identified in the permafrost affected northern boreal forest and tundra4,5. Our use of the term thermokarst landforms includes landforms traditionally termed thermo-erosional landforms. These differ from other thermokarst landforms in their dominance of lateral rather than vertical soil movement during landform development. We define the spatial extents of thermokarst landscapes to include both the areas of current thermokarst landforms and the areas susceptible to future thermokarst development. We further consider the three thermokarst landscape types to potentially overlap spatially, thus assuming that some landscape positions can be susceptible to the development of thermokarst landforms characteristic of more than one thermokarst landscape type. As an example, some landscape positions within tundra lowlands can potentially be susceptible to develop thermokarst landforms characteristic of any thermokarst landscape type.Open in a separate windowFigure 1Examples of thermokarst landscapes.Photos of (a) wetland thermokarst landscape in the Northwest Territories of Canada, with characteristic thermokarst bogs (Photo: M. Helbig), (b) lake thermokarst landscape in northern Sweden with characteristic shallow thermokarst lakes (Photo: A.B.K. Sannel) and (c) hillslope thermokarst landscape on the Taymyr Peninsula, Russia, with characteristic thermal erosion gullies (Photo: G. Hugelius).Areal extents of thermokarst landscapes in this study are estimated through a conceptual modelling framework that weighs the perceived relative influence of landscape characteristics, including ground ice content25, sedimentary overburden thickness25, permafrost zonation25, terrestrial ecoregion26, topographical roughness27 and the presence of permafrost peat soils (histels)28 (Table 1). This study encompasses the boreal and tundra ecoregions26 within the northern circumpolar permafrost zones25, covering 12.4% of the world land area (Table 2). The spatial intersection of layers containing information on landscape characteristics used in the modelling framework yields >130,000 polygons, which we henceforth refer to as regions within the overall study area. Weights of landscape characteristics for determining regional coverage of thermokarst landscapes were decided through an expert elicitation, which included input from all co-authors as well as from members of the Permafrost Carbon Network29. This process was iterative, with consensus achieved through the sharing and discussion of experts' arguments for increasing or decreasing weights. The main arguments for the final weights are described in the paragraphs below. In the final model, regional coverage of thermokarst landscapes is binned into five classes; \u2018Very High', \u2018High', \u2018Moderate', \u2018Low' and \u2018None'. Each coverage class corresponds to a fractional coverage of a region (Table 1). However, since we consider the three thermokarst landscapes to have the potential to spatially overlap within a region, the fractional regional coverage of individual thermokarst landscapes is adjusted to reflect this when more than one thermokarst landscape is present in a region (see \u2018Methods' section for full explanation of how areal extent of thermokarst landscapes within a region is estimated from coverage classes). The resulting maps show the modelled regional coverage classes of wetland, lake and hillslope thermokarst landscapes, respectively (Fig. 2a\u2013c), and the dominant or co-dominant thermokarst landscape types within each region (Fig. 3). Overall, we estimate that thermokarst landscapes cover 3.6 \u00d7 106 km2, or ~20% of the overall study area, with each of the three thermokarst landscapes contributing 5\u20138% each (Table 2).Open in a separate windowFigure 2Distribution and regional coverage of thermokarst landscapes in the northern boreal and tundra circumpolar permafrost region.Differentiation is made for (a) wetland (green shading), (b) lake (blue shading) and (c) hillslope thermokarst landscapes (red shading). Coverage is classified as \u2018Very High' (60\u2013100% regional coverage), \u2018High' (30\u201360%), \u2018Moderate' (10\u201330%), \u2018Low' (1\u201310%) and \u2018None' (0\u20131%). Hillslope thermokarst landscapes are assumed to not reach \u2018Very High' regional coverage. Yellow star symbols indicate study sites, described in literature, of thermokarst landforms characteristic of each thermokarst landscape (Supplementary Table 4-6). Background map of topography is based on GTOPO30 data (USGS, EROS, ESRI), accessed through ArcGIS 9.3.1.Open in a separate windowFigure 3Dominant or co-dominant thermokarst landscapes within the northern boreal and tundra circumpolar permafrost region.The thermokarst landscapes with the greatest estimated regional coverage are shown. Co-dominance of two or all thermokarst landscapes is shown if estimated coverage classes are equal. Green, Blue and Red shadings indicate individual dominance of wetland, lake and hillslope thermokarst landscapes, respectively. Co-dominance is indicated by cyan (wetland and lake thermokarst landscapes), yellow (wetland and hillslope thermokarst landscapes), magenta (lake and hillslope thermokarst landscapes) and grey (equal coverage of all thermokarst landscapes). Dominant coverage is classified as \u2018Very High' (60\u2013100% regional coverage), \u2018High' (30\u201360%), \u2018Moderate' (10\u201330%), \u2018Low' (1\u201310%) and \u2018None' (0\u20131%). Coverage of hillslope thermokarst landscapes are assumed to not reach \u2018Very High' regional coverage. Co-dominance combinations that have no representation in the map and are hashed in the legend. Background map of topography is based on GTOPO30 data (USGS, EROS, ESRI), accessed through ArcGIS 9.3.1.Table 1Framework for estimating regional coverage of thermokarst landscapes.\u00a0Wetland thermokarst landscapeLake thermokarst landscapeHillslope thermokarst landscape*Permafrost zone25\u2020 (continuous/discontinuous/sporadic/isolated)\u221210/\u22125/0/00/0/\u221210/\u221220\u221215/\u221215/\u221225/\u221235Ground ice content25 (>20%/10\u201320%/>10%/<10%)0/0/0/00/\u221210/\u221210/\u2212300/\u22125/\u22125/\u221235Sedimentary overburden25 (thick/thin)0/\u2212100/\u2212400/\u221210Topography27 (flat/undulating/hilly/mountainous)0/\u221215/\u221220/\u2212300/\u221230/\u221260/\u221270\u221215/0/\u22125/\u221215Histel regional coverage28 (>30%/10\u201330%/<10%)0/\u221225/\u2212500/0/0\u221210/\u22125/0Terrestrial ecozone26 (boreal/tundra)0/0\u22125/0\u221210/0\u00a0Resulting scoreThermokarst landscape coverage:\u2021\u00a0\u226425\u2018None', 0\u20131% (0%)\u00a030\u201350\u2018Low', 1\u201310% (5%)\u00a055\u201370\u2018Moderate', 10\u201330% (20%)\u00a075\u201385\u2018High', 30\u201360% (40%)\u00a090\u2013100\u2018Very High', 60\u2013100% (90%)Open in a separate windowThe framework implements a structure where points are subtracted from a maximum score of 100 based on landscape characteristics, as shown in the table. The resulting score yields the coverage classes according to the ranges shown below.*Hillslope thermokarst landscapes are considered to not be able to reach regional \u2018Very High' land cover, and thus the maximum score is 85, since at least 15 points are subtracted for the permafrost zone characteristics.\u2020Regions in the southern West Siberian Lowlands are mapped as having only relict permafrost, indicating that permafrost is not affecting the surface soils, and these regions are thus considered to have \u2018None' thermokarst landscape coverage.\u2021Numbers indicate likely ranges and mode (in brackets) for thermokarst landscape coverage within each class.Table 2Estimates of areas and soil organic carbon storage within the overall study region and in each thermokarst landscape type.\u00a0Study regionWetland thermokarst landscapeLake thermokarst landscapeHillslope thermokarst landscapeNon-thermokarst landscapeArea (106 km2)18.411.431.300.9114.77Area (% of total)1007.87.14.980.2SOC 0\u20133m (PgC)1,07316410267740SOC 0\u20133m (% of total)10015.39.56.269.0SOC 0\u20133m (kgCm\u22122)58114797450Open in a separate windowAverage soil organic carbon (SOC) concentration (kgCm\u22122) for each thermokarst landscape is reported.Wetland thermokarst landscapesTypical thermokarst landforms in wetland thermokarst landscapes include thermokarst bogs, fens and shore fens, with development dependent on hydrological landscape position. Development causes transition from boreal forest or tundra dry shrub ecosystems into sedge or Sphagnum moss wetland ecosystems with near-surface water table position4,5,15. Thermokarst landforms are typically 0.5\u201310ha but can reach sizes up to 100ha. Development leads to 1\u20133m land settlement but limited lateral soil movement.The two landscape characteristics considered most important for estimating regional coverage of wetland thermokarst landscapes are histel soil coverage and topographic ruggedness (Table 1). We consider histels to be largely susceptible to the development of wetland thermokarst landforms due to their high-ground ice content30. Because histels have high-ground ice content, we did not further use landscape information on ground ice content by itself for estimating regional coverage (Table 1). Wetland thermokarst landscapes can dominate flat landscapes with extensive histels but are assumed to be largely confined to topographic lows in regions with more topographic ruggedness, including valley bottoms and adjacent to ponds and lakes4,5,15,30,31,32,33.Secondary influences on regional coverage include permafrost zonation and sedimentary overburden thickness (Table 1). All else equal, we consider wetland thermokarst landscapes to have lower regional coverage in regions with thin sedimentary overburden and in colder permafrost zones. Thin sedimentary overburden is considered to limit the potential for vertical land subsidence and thus the development of characteristic thermokarst landforms. In colder permafrost zones, histels often occur in polygonal peatlands characterized by relatively thin organic soils1 and abundant ice wedges. In such polygonal peatlands it is more likely that thermokarst leads to the development of thermokarst troughs and pits develop5, which we consider characteristic of lake thermokarst landscapes (see below). In the non-continuous permafrost zones, our model allows wetland thermokarst landscape coverage to be greater than the permafrost coverage. This follows our definition of thermokarst landscapes, which includes both permafrost areas susceptible to future thermokarst development and non-permafrost areas of current thermokarst landforms23,31.The resulting maps show \u2018Very High' wetland thermokarst landscape coverage in well-known and extensive boreal peatland regions such as the West Siberian Lowlands, the Hudson Bay Lowlands and the Mackenzie River valley, but also indicate additional widespread \u2018Low' coverage in much of boreal Canada and Russia (Fig. 2a). Wetland thermokarst landscapes in different settings will have distinct characteristics, for example, with thermokarst landforms developing from treed peat plateaus in boreal western Canada and Alaska31 or from non-treed palsas in tundra regions of Scandinavia and northwestern Russia33. In warmer permafrost zones it is also assumed that current thermokarst landforms dominate thermokarst landscapes, while areas susceptible to future thermokarst development are more prevalent in colder permafrost zones15.Lake thermokarst landscapesLake thermokarst landscapes are characterized by lake initiation, expansion, drainage and drainage basin development. Typical thermokarst landforms include deep, shallow and glacial thermokarst lakes, thermokarst lake basins, alas basins and thaw sinks4,5. Lake thermokarst landscapes are also considered associated with collapse pingos, and thermokarst troughs and pits, which all can have aquatic phases that may develop into thermokarst lakes5. Land settlement varies between 1 and 20m, with potentially substantial lateral soil movement into inundated, anaerobic, conditions through wave action and colluvial processes. Resulting landforms vary greatly in size, with the largest landforms covering more than 5,000ha.Regional coverage of lake thermokarst landscapes is considered strongly influenced by topography, ground ice content, sedimentary overburden and permafrost zone34 (Table 1). Flat landscapes with thick sedimentary overburden and high-ground ice content are landscape characteristics considered important for abundant development of characteristic landforms4,5,21. Conceptually, we consider lake thermokarst landscapes to include the open-water areas of thermokarst landforms. Topography strongly limit the maximum attainable regional coverage of lake thermokarst landscapes in our model, and \u2018Moderate' coverage is the maximum coverage possible in regions that do not have flat topography. Regional coverage of lake thermokarst landscapes is considered limited in warmer permafrost zones due to the lower permafrost coverage, but also due to the better drainage when thermokarst landforms develop in locations without underlying deeper permafrost layers34,35. Permafrost thaw in the boreal ecoregion is further considered less likely to lead to characteristic thermokarst landforms due to thicker surface organic mats that can reduce the mechanical removal of soil material36. Thermokarst lakes are however known to potentially occur in landscapes with thick organic soils if ground ice content is high21,32, and thus we do not consider histel coverage by itself to reduce the regional coverage of lake thermokarst landscapes (Table 1).\u2018Very High' regional coverage of lake thermokarst landscapes is shown for several lowland tundra regions, including the Yukon delta, the Alaska north slope and the coastal regions along the Kara Sea, Laptev Sea and East Siberian Sea in Russia (Fig. 2b). These regions are known to have abundant thermokarst lakes34. \u2018Very High' regional coverage further includes the boreal lowland along the Lena River and its tributaries, which is known to have a high abundance of alas landforms14. Lake thermokarst landscapes are further shown to overlap substantially with wetland thermokarst landscapes in major boreal peatland regions (Fig. 2a,b), albeit with lake thermokarst landscape generally having \u2018Low' to \u2018Moderate' coverage, while wetland thermokarst landscapes have \u2018High' to \u2018Very High' coverage.Hillslope thermokarst landscapesTypical thermokarst landforms in hillslope thermokarst landscapes include active layer detachment slides, retrogressive thaw slumps, thermal erosion gullies, beaded streams and thermokarst water tracks4,5. Development can cause both substantial land subsidence and lateral soil transport through fluvial or colluvial processes. These thermokarst landforms are generally smaller than landforms of the other thermokarst landscapes, but can in some cases reach up to 10ha. Hillslope thermokarst landforms are also to a greater degree limited in their development to landscape positions on moderate slopes or along watercourses, lake shores and coasts4,5,22. For that reason, we exclude hillslope thermokarst landscapes from attaining \u2018Very High' regional coverage (Table 1). While hillslope thermokarst landscapes are considered most likely in undulating and hilly topography, \u2018Moderate' regional coverage is still considered possible in flat regions due to the association of characteristic landforms with watercourses and shores5.Primary factors, in addition to topography, considered to increase regional coverage of hillslope thermokarst landscapes are higher ground ice content, and colder permafrost zones5,36 (Table 1). Hillslope thermokarst development in warmer permafrost zones is considered limited since landscape positions preferential for characteristic thermokarst landforms is likely to already lack permafrost. Secondary influences considered for the regional coverage of hillslope thermokarst landscapes relate to the susceptibility of the landscape to erosion. Regions with thin sedimentary overburden or extensive histels, are thus less likely to be suitable for many of the characteristic thermo-erosional landforms typical of hillslope thermokarst landscapes5. Regions in the boreal ecozone are less likely to have extensive ice wedges that often act as points for hillslope thermokarst landform initiation36 (Table 1).The resulting map shows \u2018Moderate' and \u2018High' regional coverage of hillslope thermokarst landscapes in many tundra regions, including the Alaska Seward Peninsula, the Alaska North Slope, the Mackenzie River Valley, the Canadian Arctic Archipelago and coastal regions along the Kara Sea, Laptev Sea and East Siberian Sea in Russia (Fig. 2c). This indicates that hillslope thermokarst landscapes often have their greatest concentrations in regions overlapping with \u2018High' or \u2018Very High' coverage of lake thermokarst landscapes (Fig. 2b). However, \u2018Low' and \u2018Moderate' regional coverage of hillslope thermokarst landscapes is widespread in vast continental regions with more pronounced topography in western North America, the Central Siberian Plateau and in the Russian Far East.Distribution of thermokarst landscapesWhile the three thermokarst landscapes have similar estimated total areas (Table 2), their distributions differ with regards to both their spatial concentration and their relations to current climate conditions. Hillslope thermokarst landscapes are spatially least concentrated, with a majority (62%) of its total area found in regions with \u2018Moderate' or \u2018Low' coverage, compared with 32% and a mere 13% for wetland and lake thermokarst landscapes, respectively. Lake thermokarst landscapes are spatially the most concentrated, with 76% of its total area found in regions with \u2018Very High' coverage. Thermokarst landscapes also differ in their relation to current climate conditions37, with hillslope thermokarst landscapes located in regions with colder and drier climate than lake thermokarst landscapes, which in turn are generally located in regions with colder and drier climate than wetland thermokarst landscapes (Fig. 4).Open in a separate windowFigure 4Distribution of thermokarst landscapes under current climate conditions.Data uses the area and climate for each region in the map of thermokarst landscape distribution. Mean annual (a) air temperature and (b) precipitation estimates for the period 1990\u20132010 is based on a fused CRU-NCEP re-analysis data set31. Grey boxes indicate the overall study region, while green, blue and red indicate wetland, lake and hillslope thermokarst landscapes, respectively. The boxes represent 25th and 75th percentiles (that is, indicating that 50% of the areas of the overall study region and of the three thermokarst landscape types fall within the box estimates). In addition, the bar indicates the 50th percentile, and whiskers showing 5th and 95th percentiles.Evaluation of mapped thermokarst landscapesTwo independent approaches were used to evaluate the mapped regional coverages of thermokarst landscapes. First, we compiled a database of 225 locations of thermokarst landforms characteristic of wetland, lake and hillslope thermokarst landscapes (63, 92 and 69 landforms of wetland, lake, and hillslope thermokarst landscapes, respectively) described in 161 published studies (Supplementary Tables 4\u20136). The locations of these sites were compared with the corresponding mapped regional coverage of thermokarst landscapes (Figs 2a\u2013c and \u200band5).5). Roughly equal numbers of study sites (35\u201355 sites) were found within each coverage class. However, study site spatial concentrations were highest in regions with \u2018Very High' coverage, reaching a concentration of 21.0 \u00d7 10\u22126 sites km\u22122, compared with 15.6, 8.0, 4.6 and 1.1 \u00d7 10\u22126 sites km\u22122 for \u2018High', \u2018Moderate', \u2018Low' and \u2018None' coverage, respectively. This pattern of decreasing study site concentrations in lesser coverage classes remained, with minor exceptions, when assessed for each thermokarst landscape separately (Supplementary Fig. 1). While study sites are not chosen randomly due to issues of accessibility in the north, increasing site concentrations in regions with greater mapped coverage of thermokarst landscapes is what would be expected from accurate maps.Open in a separate windowFigure 5Locations of studied thermokarst landforms and mapped dominant thermokarst landscapes in Alaska and western Canada.Legend for thermokarst landscapes is same as in Fig. 3. Green circles, blue squares and red triangles represent studied thermokarst landforms characteristic of wetland, lake and hillslope thermokarst landscapes, respectively (Supplementary Tables 4\u20136). Background map of topography is based on GTOPO30 data (USGS, EROS, ESRI), accessed through ArcGIS 9.3.1.The second approach for map evaluation is based on a comparison between the mapped regional coverages of thermokarst landscapes and an expert assessment of regional coverages based on satellite image interpretation and general site knowledge at 435 sites. Site locations for this expert assessment were chosen using a stratified random sampling approach, including 150 sites each for wetland and lake thermokarst landscape assessment, and 135 sites for hillslope thermokarst landscapes (Supplementary Fig. 2). Within each thermokarst landscape type, 50 sites were selected within regions of \u2018None' coverage, and ~25 sites within regions of each of the other coverage classes. Five experts per thermokarst landscape type independently assessed the coverage of thermokarst landscapes within a 20km diameter circular polygon centred at each site location, using imagery in Google Earth (Google Inc., Mountainview, CA, USA, www.google.com/earth). All experts have previously published peer-reviewed articles on topics of relevance to the specific thermokarst landscape they assessed. Each expert was given instructions that included the definitions of the thermokarst landscapes, and of the five coverage classes used in the mapping framework. In their assessment of coverage at each site, experts were asked to take into account both their interpretation of satellite imagery available in Google Earth and their personal knowledge of local thermokarst conditions based, for example, on nearby field work. Experts were also asked to assess their confidence in their estimates of coverage at each site as high (satellite imagery highly suitable for accurate coverage estimate, and/or detailed personal knowledge of local thermokarst conditions), moderate (satellite imagery passable for accurate coverage estimate, and/or some personal knowledge of local thermokarst conditions) or low (satellite imagery unsuitable for accurate coverage estimate, and no personal knowledge of local thermokarst conditions). A consensus expert assessment of coverage for each site was determined based on the median coverage estimate of the five individual assessments.The agreement between the expert assessment and the mapped coverages of thermokarst landscapes was evaluated through analysis of error matrices (Supplementary Tables 1\u20133; Fig. 3), including determination of a weighted Kappa coefficient38. The Kappa coefficient represents a measure of agreement between expert assessment and mapped coverage which takes into account the agreement that is expected due to chance alone. A Kappa coefficient of 1 indicates perfect agreement and a value \u22640 indicates no agreement39. A weighted Kappa coefficient further takes into account that not all disagreements are equally serious, as is the case of the ordered coverage classes in this study40. We chose to report a quadratic weighted Kappa coefficient, indicating that disagreements between expert assessment and maps are considered to be successively more egregious with greater divergence. Our map evaluation shows that experts who reported higher average confidence in their estimates of coverage also had greater agreement with the maps (Fig. 6). Both expert confidence and agreement further varied by thermokarst landscape type: the lowest confidence and agreement was found for hillslope thermokarst landscapes and the highest for lake thermokarst landscapes (Fig. 6). We note that expert level of confidence increases with the typical size of thermokarst landforms characteristic for each thermokarst landscape type, suggesting that the evaluation method is less suitable for assessing hillslope thermokarst landscape coverage due to issues with identifying typical landforms. Despite experts expressing overall limited confidence in their estimates of ground conditions, weighted Kappa coefficients for the consensus expert assessments of each thermokarst landscape type were 0.59\u00b10.13 (\u00b12 s.e.), 0.70\u00b10.08 and 0.42\u00b10.14, for wetland, lake and hillslope thermokarst landscapes, respectively (Fig. 6), indicating moderate to substantial agreement with the maps39,40.Open in a separate windowFigure 6Relationship between expert confidence and the agreement between expert assessment and mapped coverages of thermokarst landscapes.Agreement between expert assessment and mapped coverages are estimated using a Kappa coefficient with quadratic weighting (\u03baw). Interpretation of \u03baw has been proposed33, where 0.01\u20130.20 indicate slight agreement, 0.21\u20130.40 fair agreement, 0.41\u20130.60 moderate agreement, 0.61\u20130.80 substantial agreement and 0.81\u20131 almost perfect agreement. Small symbols represent average individual expert confidence and assessment agreement with mapped coverages, while the larger symbol for each thermokarst landscape type is based on the consensus expert assessment. Expert assessments of wetland, lake and hillslope thermokarst landscape coverages are indicated by green, blue and red symbols, respectively. Error bars indicate\u00b12 s.e. of \u03baw, and is only shown for the consensus expert assessments.Carbon storage in thermokarst landscapesThermokarst landforms are often associated with landscapes that have high concentrations of below-ground organic carbon content15,16,17,18. To estimate the fraction of the below-ground organic carbon within the overall study region stored in thermokarst landscapes, we overlaid the resulting maps of thermokarst landscapes with estimates of regional 0\u20133m SOC content28. The spatially interpolated data of regional overall SOC content further include information on constituent SOC concentrations (kgCm\u22122) for both permafrost soils (histels, orthels and turbels), non-permafrost soils (histosols, and a combined class of other mineral soil types), as well as on spatial coverage of non-soils (for example, rock lands) with negligible SOC concentrations. To estimate 0\u20133m regional SOC storage of thermokarst landscapes, we first assumed that regional wetland thermokarst landscape SOC concentration could be approximated by using the regionally area-weighted SOC concentrations of histels and histosols (see \u2018Methods' section). Using information on SOC concentrations from both permafrost and non-permafrost organic soils acknowledges that wetland thermokarst landscapes are a mosaic of non-permafrost thermokarst landforms and permafrost areas susceptible to future thermokarst. For lake and hillslope thermokarst landscapes, we then assumed that SOC concentrations were approximated by the area-weighted SOC concentrations of histels, orthels and turbels (that is, of permafrost soils). Lastly, regional SOC content of non-thermokarst landscapes was estimated as a residual by subtracting SOC content of thermokarst landscapes from the overall SOC content.We estimate that thermokarst landscapes accordingly store ~330 Pg SOC in the upper 3m, constituting ~30% of the total 0\u20133m SOC storage within the overall study region (Table 2). Wetland thermokarst landscapes are estimated to have the highest 0\u20133m SOC storage at ~165Pg SOC, about half of the total thermokarst landscape SOC storage, as a result of having the highest average SOC concentration at ~115kgCm\u22122. Both lake and hillslope thermokarst landscapes also had higher 0\u20133m SOC concentrations at ~80 and ~75kgCm\u22122, respectively, than non-thermokarst landscapes at ~50kgCm\u22122 (Table 2). While estimates of 0\u20133m SOC storage in thermokarst sensitive landscapes include large uncertainties, stemming from both spatial extrapolation of SOC content from site specific pedon data28 and from our assumptions in determining coverage and SOC concentrations, our results support the notion that SOC within the overall study region is highly concentrated within thermokarst landscapes.It is very likely that thermokarst landscapes would be found to store an even greater fraction of the total study region below-ground organic carbon storage if thermokarst lake sediments and SOC storage below 3m depth were accounted for. Boreal peatlands within wetland thermokarst landscapes can reach depths well below 3m41. Of great significance also are Yedoma landscapes and Arctic Ocean deltas, both dominated by thick frozen deposits that often are >20m deep and thus have very large total organic carbon storage, despite low to moderate carbon content in the sediments42. Together they store an estimated ~380PgC below 3m in areas that spatially largely overlap with regions that have \u2018Very High' coverage of lake thermokarst landscapes1,18,42. Including these Yedoma, lacustrine and deltaic sediments and their deeper carbon stores suggest that thermokarst landscapes store approximately half of the total study region below-ground organic carbon, despite covering only 20% of the area.DiscussionIn this study we have described the development of maps indicating coverage of thermokarst landscapes, where the determination of regional coverage is tied to available information on landscape characteristics. While the accuracy of the resulting maps explicitly depends on a judicious consideration of the relative importance of different landscape characteristics, their accuracies are also critically dependent on the quality of the underlying data layers. While all data layers used in the assessment spanned the overall circumpolar study region, they varied greatly in their spatial resolution and level of detail. As such, the implications of combining data layers of varying resolution and quality need to be considered when interpreting and using the resulting maps. For example, the data layers with ground ice content, sedimentary overburden thickness and permafrost zonation have extremely broad regionalization25, and higher resolution assessments of these landscape characteristics at local scales show a heterogeneity that is not captured by the sources we used20,42. Several data layers, including those with permafrost zonation25 and histel distribution28, are further based on a compilation of different national inventories that each use somewhat different mapping approaches. This is likely to cause some inconsistencies in the resulting coverage estimates and levels of spatial detail for thermokarst landscapes among countries. Lastly, the overlay of the included data layers created more than 130,000 regions within the overall study region, thus generating a considerable fine-scale spatial detail (~28% of polygons are <1ha in size), which partially is caused by differences in data layer resolutions and chance polygon intersections rather than true differences in landscape characteristics. We therefore caution the interpretation of fine-scale patterns in the resulting maps, and acknowledge that more appropriate data layers may be available for assessing fine-scale patterns of thermokarst landscapes within specific regions43.Evaluations of the resulting maps suggest, despite the inherent drawbacks of the mapping approach outlined above, that accuracy is adequate for many large-scale applications. Studied thermokarst landforms were disproportionally located within regions mapped with higher coverages of thermokarst landscapes, and expert site assessment of thermokarst landscape coverage had moderate to substantial agreement with mapped coverages. Neither approach, however, constitute a formal statistical analysis of map accuracy. For example, the agreement between expert assessment and mapped coverage of thermokarst landscapes cannot be directly interpreted to indicate map accuracy, since it is not known how well the expert assessments approximate ground truth conditions. While fine-scale pattern of thermokarst landscapes should be interpreted with caution, the resulting maps do correctly identify many of the larger regions known to have abundant thermokarst landforms, for example, landforms characteristic of wetland thermokarst landscapes in the Mackenzie River valley15, lake thermokarst landscapes in coastal lowland regions in eastern Siberia42 and Alaska21, and hillslope thermokarst landscapes in the foothills of the Brooks Range in Alaska22. Improved accuracy and level of detail for data layers of landscape characteristics, perhaps especially of ground ice conditions, would likely further improve the accuracy of the thermokarst map but would require a substantial coordinated effort of experts. Living databases with type and location of thermokarst landforms compiled by both members of the scientific community and the public could be an attainable and powerful way to further improve the resulting thermokarst maps, and would have many further uses. Overall we conclude, even with limitations, that the resulting maps represent an important advancement for the ability to assess broad scale impacts of accelerated thermokarst, for example, on infrastructure, landscape ecology, surface water quality, catchment hydrology, soil carbon cycling and greenhouse gas exchange with the atmosphere.Vulnerability to thermokarst development is likely to increase this century both due to climate change and associated higher frequencies of disturbances such as wildfire and floods2,44,45. Gradual decadal increases in average annual temperatures have already been linked to an altered balance between thermokarst lake expansion and drainage21,34, and to accelerated expansion of thermokarst bogs23,31. Conversely, thermokarst landforms typical of hillslope thermokarst landscapes have been shown to have initiations and continued development largely confined to brief periods of extreme weather, particularly when unusually warm temperatures and high precipitation coincide22,46. Thresholds with regards to climate variables for thermokarst development thus likely depend on both the thermokarst landform considered, along with local ecosystem characteristics and hydrological landscape positions2. At broader scales it is however expected that it is the regional magnitude of climate change and associated shifts in disturbance frequency, rather than site specific thresholds, that will determine rates of future thermokarst initiation and development. Projections of climate change are largely consistent among climate models and forcing scenarios with regards to which regions that are likely to experience faster or slower than average climate change over this century47,48. The fastest change, with regards to both increasing mean annual air temperatures and precipitation, is generally expected for the coastal regions along the Arctic Ocean, likely driven by factors such as polar amplification, sea-ice retreat, and altered circulation patterns of oceans and atmosphere. Hence, regions with high coverage of lake and hillslope thermokarst landscapes in tundra regions in Eurasia, and in the northern Mackenzie River valley, are likely to be among the most vulnerable to accelerated thermokarst development. Noteworthy is that many highly vulnerable regions in Russia remain largely undescribed in English-language scientific literature (Fig. 2a\u2013c), and thus may still hold surprises to our understanding of impacts of accelerated thermokarst, for example, on carbon cycling49.We estimate that approximately half of the below-ground organic carbon within the study region is stored in thermokarst landscapes. Accurately accounting for the impact of thermokarst on C cycling is important since field evidence indicate that current models of high-latitude greenhouse gas exchange with the atmosphere may underestimate the impact of climate change by not explicitly considering thermokarst. Early stages of thermokarst development of specific thermokarst landforms is known to have the potential to cause large methane emissions to the atmosphere50,51 or downstream export of particulate and dissolved organic carbon into downstream ecosystems52,53. Rapid C loss in many thermokarst landforms is also likely facilitated by increased microbial access to SOC, as SOC thawed through thermokarst processes often remains unfrozen year round17,34. In addition, many regions indicated to have \u2018Very High' coverage of lake thermokarst landscapes are dominated by Yedoma ground42, which has been found to contain SOC that is particularly microbially labile as a result of its unique genesis54,55. Despite the significant and rapid C mineralization following thermokarst, new accumulation of organic carbon in the form of peat or lake sediments could dominate over early losses on century to millscales18,30,56,57. These long term trajectories of post-thaw carbon cycling are important to consider since a large fraction of the SOC in thermokarst landscapes already has undergone one or more cycles of thermokarst development and permafrost re-aggradation. While our understanding of post-thaw trajectories of carbon cycling in thermokarst landforms is progressing58, new knowledge is needed with respect to how trajectories vary depending on landform type, SOC storage, SOC quality and landform history.The permafrost carbon feedback, whereby climate change causes SOC mineralization and greenhouse gas emissions from permafrost soils to the atmosphere, is currently poorly constrained3,9,10,11. Combining maps of thermokarst landscapes with projections of future climates and emerging knowledge of post-thaw carbon cycling trajectories in thermokarst landforms, represents an essential step forward for estimating potential rates of permafrost SOC mineralization resulting from thermokarst. As such, the thermokarst landscapes maps produced in this study are important for reducing the uncertainty of the magnitude of the permafrost carbon feedback, and for enabling a comparison of permafrost SOC mineralization resulting from active layer deepening and thermokarst.MethodsModelling thermokarst landscape distributionThe spatial modelling framework implemented for estimating regional coverage of thermokarst landscapes in this study is based on an expert evaluation of the relative importance of a number of landscape characteristics. For this purpose, we used a set of six spatial circumpolar data layers describing key landscape characteristics; permafrost zonation (isolated, sporadic, discontinuous or continuous)25, ground ice content (<10%, 10\u201320% or >20%)25, sedimentary overburden thickness (thin or thick)25, terrestrial ecoregion (boreal or tundra)26, topographic ruggedness (flat, undulating, hilly or mountainous/rugged)27 and landscape coverage of histels (<10%, 10\u201330% or >30%)28. The spatial intersection of these layers results in 132,089 polygons (that is, regions) of variable size, with 28% of regions <1ha and 13% >1,000ha. The largest region covers 0.3% of the overall study region. Large lakes and glaciers were excluded from the overall study region and not part of the analysis.The framework uses a subtractive score structure, with a unique set of scores for each thermokarst landscape type (Table 1). Points are subtracted from a maximum score for landscape characteristics considered to render a region less likely to have extensive coverage of thermokarst landscapes. The resulting score is categorized into five thermokarst landscape coverage classes, ranging from \u2018None' to \u2018Very High'. Each coverage class corresponds to an estimated fractional coverage of a region, with both a range and a mode for each class (Table 1). The mode fractional coverage is used to estimate areas of thermokarst landscapes within individual regions. Hillslope thermokarst landscapes were deemed improbable to exceed 60% regional coverage and thus the framework prevents it from attaining \u2018Very High' coverage.When two or all thermokarst landscapes are present in an individual region (that is, >\u2018None' coverage), then their fractional coverages are adjusted to take into account that we consider thermokarst landscapes to potentially overlap and occupy the same area. In this case, the thermokarst landscape type with the highest coverage class determines the cumulative fractional coverage of all three thermokarst landscapes. Adjusted fractional coverages for each thermokarst landscape type are subsequently calculated accordingly:where FW is the adjusted regional coverage for wetland thermokarst landscapes that take into account co-occurrence of all thermokarst landscapes, while fW, fL and fH are the unadjusted coverages set by the class modes (Table 1) for wetland, lake and hillslope thermokarst landscape coverages respectively, and fmax is the maximum of fW, fL and fH. Solving for FL and FH (adjusted regional lake and hillslope thermokarst landscape coverages) is done analogously. This means, for example, that a region with \u2018High' wetland and lake, and \u2018Low' hillslope thermokarst landscape coverage will have adjusted coverages of 19, 19 and 2%, respectively, rather than the 40, 40 and 5% if coverages were unadjusted.Thermokarst landscape SOC estimatesEstimates of 0\u20133m SOC storage for non-thermokarst landscapes and the three thermokarst landscape types within each region are based on available spatial information of 0\u20133m SOC storage1. This spatial information on SOC storage is scaled using on pedon data stratified both by depth (0\u20131m/1\u20132m/2\u20133m), and by soil type1. Partitioning of the total 0\u20133m SOC storage within each region of this study uses information of the adjusted thermokarst landscape coverages along with region-specific SOC concentrations (kgCm\u22122) and areal coverages of different soil types (histosols, histels, turbels, orthels and a category of other non-permafrost soils). Wetland thermokarst landscape SOC concentration within a specific region is estimated by using the area-weighted SOC concentrations of histosols and histels within that region. This again acknowledges that wetland thermokarst landscapes are assumed to be a mix of permafrost and non-permafrost peatland ecosystems. Lake and hillslope thermokarst landscape SOC concentrations are both determined by the area-weighted SOC concentrations of histels, turbels and orthels. Non-thermokarst landscape SOC storage is determined by the residual SOC storage after all thermokarst landscape SOC is subtracted from the total regional SOC storage.Thermokarst landform databaseA database of thermokarst landform study sites (differentiating between thermokarst landforms typical of wetland, lake and hillslope thermokarst landscapes) was compiled from published scientific literature within personal libraries and through Web of Science. Study sites were only included in the database if no other site characteristic of the same thermokarst landscape type was already located within 30km. This exclusion of nearby sites was done to avoid over-representation of a few intensely studied sites. Hence, the database is not an exhaustive thermokarst literature list, but includes 225 study sites described in 161 studies (Supplementary Tables 4\u20136). The number and concentrations of study sites within regions of each thermokarst landscape coverage class was calculated (Supplementary Fig. 1).Data availabilityThe maps of thermokarst landscape distribution are published as images and in a polygon data-format through Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) Distributed Active Archive Center for Biogeochemical Dynamics (DAAC) with the identifier \u2018 https://dx.doi.org/10.3334/ORNLDAAC/1332' (ref. 59). Data attributes include polygon total area, thermokarst landscape area of each type, total SOC and SOC stored in each thermokarst landscape type.Additional informationHow to cite this article: Olefeldt, D. et al. Circumpolar distribution and carbon storage of thermokarst landscapes. Nat. Commun. 7, 13043 doi: 10.1038/ncomms13043 (2016).Supplementary MaterialSupplementary Information: Supplementary Figures 1-3, Supplementary Tables 1-6 and Supplementary ReferencesClick here to view.(604K, pdf)AcknowledgmentsThis project benefited from input from members of the Permafrost Carbon Network (www.permafrostcarbon.org). Supporting funding to the Permafrost Carbon Network was provided by the National Science Foundation Network Grant #955713 and the National Science Foundation SEARCH Grant #1331083. Author contributions were also supported by individual grants: D.O.\u2014the Campus Alberta Innovates Program, G.G.\u2014ERC #338335 and HGF #ERC-0013, D.H.\u2014Department of Energy (DOE) Early Career Award (DOEBER #3ERKP818), G.H.\u2014the Swedish Research Council and the EU JPI COUP consortium, A.D.M.\u2014the U.S. Geological Survey Alaska Climate Science Center and the U.S. Geological Survey Land Carbon Program, E.A.G.S\u2014U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science, Office of Biological and Environmental Sciences Division Terrestrial Ecosystem Sciences program, Award #DE-SC0006982. Thanks goes to Andrew Balser, Benjamin Abbott, Claire Treat and Cristian Estop-Aragones for carrying out evaluations of the thermokarst landscape maps. Guangsheng Chen aided the climate data analysis and Andrew Kohlenberg created the figures, helped design the expert evaluation and expanded the database of study sites. Any use of trade, firm or product names is for descriptive purposes only and does not imply endorsement by the U.S. Government.FootnotesAuthor contributions D.O. conceived and designed the study, carried out analysis and wrote the manuscript. S.G. and D.H. carried out the GIS aspects of the project. G.G. and A.B.K.S. compiled the database of study sites and carried out expert evaluations of the maps. G.H., P.K., A.D.M., E.A.G.S. and M.R.T. carried out expert evaluations of the maps. All co-authors helped develop the framework for estimating distribution of thermokarst landscapes and assisted in the writing of the manuscript.ReferencesHugelius G. et al. . Estimated stocks of circumpolar permafrost carbon with quantified uncertainty ranges and identified data gaps. Biogeosciences 11, 6573\u20136593 (2014).Grosse G. et al. . Vulnerability of high-latitude soil organic carbon in North America to disturbance. J. Geophys. Res.Biogeosci. 116, G00K06 (2011).Schuur E. A. G. et al. . Climate change and the permafrost carbon feedback. Nature 520, 171\u2013179 (2015). [PubMed]Jorgenson M. T. in Treatise on Geomorphology Vol. 8 (eds Giardino, R. & Harbor, J.) 313\u2013324 (Academic Press, 2013).Kokelj S. & Jorgenson M. T. Advances in thermokarst research. Permafrost Periglac 24, 108\u2013119 (2013).Arneth A. et al. . Terrestrial biogeochemical feedbacks in the climate system. Nat. Geosci. 3, 525\u2013532 (2010).Lawrence D. M., Slater A. G. & Swenson S. C. Simulation of present day and future permafrost and seasonally frozen ground conditions in CCSM4. J. Clim. 25, 2207\u20132225 (2012).Harden J. W. et al. . Field information links permafrost carbon to physical vulnerabilities of thawing. Geophys. Res. Lett. 39, L15704 (2012).Hayes D. J. et al. . The impacts of recent permafrost thaw on land-atmosphere greenhouse gas exchange. Environ. Res. Lett. 9, 045005 (2014).Schaefer K., Lantuit H., Romanovsky V. E., Schuur E. A. G. & Witt R. The impact of the permafrost carbon feedback on global climate. Environ. Res. Lett. 9, 085003 (2014).Koven C. D., Lawrence D. M. & Riley W. J. Permafrost carbon-climate feedback is sensitive to deep soil carbon decomposability but not deep soil nitrogen dynamics. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 112, 3752\u20133757 (2015). [PMC free article] [PubMed]Hopkins D. M. Thaw lakes and thaw sinks in the Imuruk Lake area, Seward Peninsula, Alaska. J. Geol. 57, 119\u2013131 (1949).Czudek T. & Demek J. Thermokarst in Siberia and its influence on the development of lowland relief. Quatern. Res. 1, 103\u2013120 (1970).Soloviev P. A. Thermokarst phenomena and landforms due to frostheaving in central Yakutia. Biuletyn Peryglacjalny 23, 135\u2013155 (1973).Vitt D. H. & Halsey L. A. The bog landforms of continental western Canada in relation to climate and permafrost patterns. Arctic Alpine Res. 26, 1\u201313 (1994).Schuur E. A. G. et al. . The effect of permafrost thaw on old carbon release and net carbon exchange from tundra. Nature 459, 556\u2013559 (2009). [PubMed]O'Donnell J. A. et al. . The effects of permafrost thaw on soil hydrologic, thermal, and carbon dynamics in an Alaskan peatland. Ecosystems 15, 213\u2013229 (2012).Walter Anthony K. M. et al. . A shift of thermokarst lakes from carbon sources to sinks during the Holocene epoch. Nature 511, 452\u2013456 (2014). [PubMed]Kachurin S. P. Thermokarst on the USSR Terrain Academy of Science Press (1961).Jorgenson T. et al. . in Ninth International Conference on Permafrost, Extended abstracts (eds Kane, D. L. & Hinkel, K. M.) (Institute of Northern Engineering, University of Alaska, 2008).Jones B. M. et al. . Modern thermokarst lake dynamics in the continuous permafrost zone, northern Seward peninsula, Alaska. J. Geophys. Res. Biogeosci 116, G00M03 (2011).Balser A. W., Jones J. B. & Gens R. Timing of retrogressive thaw slumps initiation in the Noatak Basin, northwest Alaska, USA. J. Geophys. Res. Earth Surf. 119, F002889 (2014).Baltzer J. L., Veness T., Chasmer L. E., Sniderhan A. E. & Quinton W. L. Forest on thawing permafrost: fragmentation, edge effects, and net forest loss. Glob. Chang. Biol. 20, 824\u2013834 (2014). [PubMed]Nelson F. E., Anisimov O. A. & Shiklomanov N. I. Subsidence risk from thawing permafrost. Nature 410, 889\u2013890 (2001). [PubMed]Brown J., Ferrians O., Heginbottom J. A. & Melnikov E. Circum-Arctic Map of Permafrost and Ground-Ice Conditions National Snow and Ice Data Center (2014).Olson D. M. et al. . Terrestrial ecoregions of the world: a new map of life on Earth. Bioscience 51, 933\u2013938 (2001).Gruber S. Derivation and analysis of a high-resolution estimate of global permafrost zonation. Cryosphere 6, 221\u2013233 (2012).Hugelius G. et al. . The Northern Circumpolar Soil Carbon Database: spatially distributed datasets of soil coverage and soil carbon storage in the northern permafrost regions. Earth Syst. Sci. Data 5, 3\u201313 (2013). Permafrost Carbon Network. www.permafrostcarbon.org (2016).Kuhry P. Palsa and peat plateau development in the Hudson Bay Lowlands, Canada: timing, pathways and causes. Boreas 37, 316\u2013327 (2008).Camill P. Permafrost thaw accelerates in boreal peatlands during late-20th century warming. Clim. Change 1-2, 135\u2013152 (2005).Sannel A. B. K. & Kuhry P. Warming-induced destabilization of peat plateau/thermokarst lake complexes. J. Geophys. Res. Biogeosci. 116, G03035 (2011).Olefeldt D. et al. . Net carbon accumulation of a high-latitude permafrost palsa mire similar to permafrost-free peatlands. Geophys. Res. Lett. 39, L03501 (2012).Grosse G., Jones B. & Arp C. in Treatise on Geomorphology Vol. 8 (eds Giardino, R. & Harbor, J.) 325\u2013353 (Academic Press, 2013).Osterkamp T. E. et al. . Observations of thermokarst and its impacts on boreal forests in Alaska, U.S.A. Arctic Antarctic Alpine Res. 32, 303\u2013315 (2000).Jorgenson M. T. & Osterkamp T. E. Response of boreal ecosystems to varying modes of permafrost degradation. Can. J. For. Res. 35, 2100\u20132111 (2005).Wei Y. et al. . The North American Carbon Program multi-scale synthesis and terrestrial model intercomparison project\u2014Part 2: Environmental driver data. Geosci. Model Dev. 7, 2875\u20132893 (2014).Cohen J. Weighted Kappa: nominal scale agreement with provision for scaled disagreement or partial credit. Psychol. Bull. 70, 213\u2013220 (1969). [PubMed]Landis J. R. & Koch G. G. The measurement of observer agreement for categorical data. Biometrics 33, 159\u2013174 (1977). [PubMed]Naesset E. Use of the weighted Kappa coefficient in classification error assessment of thematic maps. Int. J. Geogr. Inf. Sci. 10, 591\u2013603 (1996).Loisel J. et al. . A database and synthesis of northern peatland soil properties and Holocene carbon and nitrogen accumulation. Holocene 24, 1028\u20131042 (2014).Strauss J. et al. . The deep permafrost carbon pool of the Yedoma region in Siberia and Alaska. Geophys. Res. Lett. 40, 6165\u20136170 (2013). [PMC free article] [PubMed]Niu F., Lin Z., Lu J., Luo J. & Wang H. Assessment of terrain susceptibility to thermokarst lake development along the Qinghai\u2013Tibet engineering corridor, China. Environ. Earth Sci. 73, 5631\u20135642.Coumou D. & Rahmstorf S. A decade of weather extremes. Nat. Clim. Chang. 2, 491\u2013496 (2012).Turetsky M. R. et al. . Recent acceleration of biomass burning and carbon losses in Alaskan forests and peatlands. Nat. Geosci. 4, 27\u201331 (2011).Kokelj S. V. et al. . Increased precipitation drives mega slump development and destabilization of ice-rich permafrost terrain, northwestern Canada. Glob. Planet. Chang. 129, 56\u201368 (2015).Collins M. et al. . in Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (eds Stocker, T. F. et al. .) (Cambridge University Press, 2013).Meehl G. A. et al. . Climate system response to external forcings and climate change projections in CCSM4. J. Clim. 25, 3661\u20133683 (2012).Kunitsky V. V. et al. . Ice-rich permafrost and thermal denudation in the Batagay area (Yana Upland, East Siberia). Kriosfera Zemli. 17, 56\u201368 (2013).Olefeldt D., Turetsky M. R., Crill P. M. & McGuire A. D. Environmental and physical controls on northern terrestrial methane emissions across permafrost zones. Glob. Chang. Biol. 19, 589\u2013603 (2013). [PubMed]Walter K. M., Zimov S., Chanton J. P., Verbyla D. & Chapin F. S. III Methane bubbling from Siberian thaw lakes as a positive feedback to climate warming. Nature 443, 71\u201375 (2006). [PubMed]Lamoreaux S. F. & Lafreniere M. J. Seasonal fluxes and age of particulate organic carbon exported from Arctic catchments impacted by localized permafrost slope disturbances. Environ. Res. Lett. 9, 045002 (2014).Olefeldt D. & Roulet N. T. Permafrost conditions in peatlands regulate magnitude, timing, and chemical composition of catchment dissolved organic carbon. Glob. Chang. Biol. 20, 3122\u20133136 (2014). [PubMed]Dutta K., Schuur E. A. G., Neff J. C. & Zimov S. A. Potential carbon release from permafrost soils of Northeastern Siberia. Glob. Chang. Biol. 12, 2336\u20132351 (2006).Vonk J. E. et al. . High biolability of ancient permafrost carbon upon thaw. Geophys. Res. Lett. 40, 2689\u20132693 (2013).Hinkel K. M. et al. . Spatial extent, age, and carbon stocks in drained thaw lake basins on the Barrow Peninsula, Alaska. Arctic Antarctic Alpine Res. 35, 291\u2013300 (2003).Treat C. et al. . Effects of permafrost aggradation on peat properties as determined from a pan-arctic synthesis of plant macrofossils. J. Geophys. Res. Biogeosci. 121, 78\u201394 (2016).Schneider von Deimling T. et al. . Observation-based modelling of permafrost carbon fluxes with accounting for deep carbon deposits and thermokarst activity. Biogeosciences 12, 3469\u20133488 (2014).Olefeldt D. et al. . Arctic Circumpolar Distribution and Soil Carbon of Thermokarst Landscapes, 2015. https://dx.doi.org/10.3334/ORNLDAAC/1332 (ORNL DAAC, Oak Ridge, TN, USA, 2016).Articles from Nature Communications are provided here courtesy of Nature Publishing Group How does Europe PMC derive its citations network? \u2022 Web of Science\u00ae times cited ()- subscription required Show all items Show all items Show all items Show all items CitePeer Related Articles http://citepeer.io/#/?pubmedId=27725633 Genes & Proteins Show all items Protein Interactions Show all items Protein Families Show all items Nucleotide Sequences Show all items Functional Genomics Experiments Show all items Protein Structures Show all items Gene Ontology (GO) Terms Show all items Species Show all items Diseases Show all items Data Citations Show all items Chemicals Show all items Experimental Factor Ontology (EFO) Terms Show all items Proteomics Data Show all items Menu Formats Abstract Full Text PDF About About Europe PMC Funders Joining Europe PMC Governance Roadmap Outreach Tools Tools overview ORCID article claiming Journal list Grant finder External links service RSS feeds SciLite annotations Annotations submission Service Developers Developer resources Articles RESTful API Grants RESTful API SOAP web service Annotations API OAI service Bulk downloads Help Help using Europe PMC Contact us Contact us Helpdesk Feedback Twitter Blog Tech blog \u03b2Explore the beta version Europe PMC plus Europe PMC is part of the ELIXIR infrastructure Europe PMC is an ELIXIR Core Data Resource Learn more > Europe PMC is a service of the Europe PMC Funders' Group, in partnership with the European Bioinformatics Institute; and in cooperation with the National Center for Biotechnology Information at the U.S. National Library of Medicine (NCBI/NLM). It includes content provided to the PMC International archive by participating publishers. Contact the Helpdesk Visit the blog Follow EuropePMC_news on Twitter Leave feedback Contact Us | Privacy | Terms of Use | Copyright | Accessibility", "Warming Arctic Permafrost Fuels Climate Change Worries - The New York Times NYTimes.com no longer supports Internet Explorer 9 or earlier. Please upgrade your browser. LEARN MORE \u00bb Sections Home Search Skip to content Skip to navigation View mobile version The New York Times Environment|As Permafrost Thaws, Scientists Study the Risks Search Subscribe Now Log In 0 Settings Close search Site Search Navigation Search NYTimes.com Clear this text input Go Loading... See next articles See previous articles Site Navigation Site Mobile Navigation Advertisement Supported by Environment | Temperature Rising As Permafrost Thaws, Scientists Study the Risks By JUSTIN GILLISDEC. 16, 2011 Continue reading the main story Share This Page Continue reading the main story Photo Katey M. Walter Anthony, a scientist, investigated a plume of methane, a greenhouse gas, at an Alaskan lake. Dr. Walter Anthony is a leading researcher in studying the escape of methane. Credit Josh Haner/The New York Times FAIRBANKS, Alaska \u2014 A bubble rose through a hole in the surface of a frozen lake. It popped, followed by another, and another, as if a pot were somehow boiling in the icy depths.Every bursting bubble sent up a puff of methane, a powerful greenhouse gas generated beneath the lake from the decay of plant debris. These plants last saw the light of day 30,000 years ago and have been locked in a deep freeze \u2014 until now.\u201cThat\u2019s a hot spot,\u201d declared Katey M. Walter Anthony, a leading scientist in studying the escape of methane. A few minutes later, she leaned perilously over the edge of the ice, plunging a bottle into the water to grab a gas sample.It was another small clue for scientists struggling to understand one of the biggest looming mysteries about the future of the earth. Advertisement Continue reading the main story Experts have long known that northern lands were a storehouse of frozen carbon, locked up in the form of leaves, roots and other organic matter trapped in icy soil \u2014 a mix that, when thawed, can produce methane and carbon dioxide, gases that trap heat and warm the planet. But they have been stunned in recent years to realize just how much organic debris is there. Continue reading the main story Advertisement Continue reading the main story A recent estimate suggests that the perennially frozen ground known as permafrost, which underlies nearly a quarter of the Northern Hemisphere, contains twice as much carbon as the entire atmosphere.Temperatures are warming across much of that region, primarily, scientists believe, because of the rapid human release of greenhouse gases. Permafrost is warming, too. Some has already thawed, and other signs are emerging that the frozen carbon may be becoming unstable.\u201cIt\u2019s like broccoli in your freezer,\u201d said Kevin Schaefer, a scientist at the National Snow and Ice Data Center in Boulder, Colo. \u201cAs long as the broccoli stays in the freezer, it\u2019s going to be O.K. But once you take it out of the freezer and put it in the fridge, it will thaw out and eventually decay.\u201dIf a substantial amount of the carbon should enter the atmosphere, it would intensify the planetary warming. An especially worrisome possibility is that a significant proportion will emerge not as carbon dioxide, the gas that usually forms when organic material breaks down, but as methane, produced when the breakdown occurs in lakes or wetlands. Methane is especially potent at trapping the sun\u2019s heat, and the potential for large new methane emissions in the Arctic is one of the biggest wild cards in climate science.Scientists have declared that understanding the problem is a major priority. The United States Department of Energy and the European Union recently committed to new projects aimed at doing so, and NASA is considering a similar plan. But researchers say the money and people devoted to the issue are still minimal compared with the risk.For now, scientists have many more questions than answers. Preliminary computer analyses, made only recently, suggest that the Arctic and sub-Arctic regions could eventually become an annual source of carbon equal to 15 percent or so of today\u2019s yearly emissions from human activities.But those calculations were deliberately cautious. A recent survey drew on the expertise of 41 permafrost scientists to offer more informal projections. They estimated that if human fossil-fuel burning remained high and the planet warmed sharply, the gases from permafrost could eventually equal 35 percent of today\u2019s annual human emissions. Advertisement Continue reading the main story The experts also said that if humanity began getting its own emissions under control soon, the greenhouse gases emerging from permafrost could be kept to a much lower level, perhaps equivalent to 10 percent of today\u2019s human emissions.Even at the low end, these numbers mean that the long-running international negotiations over greenhouse gases are likely to become more difficult, with less room for countries to continue burning large amounts of fossil fuels.In the minds of most experts, the chief worry is not that the carbon in the permafrost will break down quickly \u2014 typical estimates say that will take more than a century, perhaps several \u2014 but that once the decomposition starts, it will be impossible to stop.\u201cEven if it\u2019s 5 or 10 percent of today\u2019s emissions, it\u2019s exceptionally worrying, and 30 percent is humongous,\u201d said Josep G. Canadell, a scientist in Australia who runs a global program to monitor greenhouse gases. \u201cIt will be a chronic source of emissions that will last hundreds of years.\u201dA troubling trend has emerged recently: Wildfires are increasing across much of the north, and early research suggests that extensive burning could lead to a more rapid thaw of permafrost.Rise and Fall of PermafrostStanding on a bluff the other day, overlooking an immense river valley, A. David McGuire, a scientist from the University of Alaska, Fairbanks, sketched out two million years of the region\u2019s history. It was the peculiar geology of western North America and eastern Siberia, he said, that caused so much plant debris to get locked in an ice box there.These areas were not covered in glaciers during the last ice age, but the climate was frigid, with powerful winds. The winds and rivers carried immense volumes of silt and dust that settled in the lowlands of Alaska and Siberia.A thin layer of this soil thawed on top during the summers and grasses grew, capturing carbon dioxide. In the bitter winters, grass roots, leaves and even animal parts froze before they could decompose. Layer after layer of permafrost built up. Advertisement Continue reading the main story At the peak of the ice age, 20,000 years ago, the frozen ground was more extensive than today, stretching deep into parts of the lower 48 states that were not covered by ice sheets. Climate-change contrarians like to point to that history, contending that any melting of permafrost and ice sheets today is simply the tail end of the ice age.Citing permafrost temperatures for northern Alaska \u2014 which, though rising rapidly, remain well below freezing \u2014 an organization called the Center for the Study of Carbon Dioxide and Global Change claimed that permafrost is in \u201cno more danger of being wiped out any time soon than it was in the days of our great-grandparents.\u201dBut mainstream scientists, while hoping the breakdown of permafrost will indeed be slow, reject that argument. They say the climate was reasonably stable for the past 10,000 years or so, during the period when human civilization arose. Now, as people burn immense amounts of carbon in the form of fossil fuels, the planet\u2019s temperature is rising, and the Arctic is warming twice as fast. That, scientists say, puts the remaining permafrost deposits at risk.For several decades, researchers have been monitoring permafrost temperatures in hundreds of boreholes across the north. The temperatures have occasionally decreased in some regions for periods as long as a decade, but the overall trend has been a relentless rise, with temperatures now increasing fastest in the most northerly areas.Thawing has been most notable at the southern margins. Across huge areas, including much of central Alaska, permafrost is hovering just below the freezing point, and is expected to start thawing in earnest as soon as the 2020s. In northern Alaska and northern Siberia, where permafrost is at least 12 degrees Fahrenheit below freezing, experts say it should take longer.\u201cEven in a greenhouse-warmed world, it will still get cold and dark in the Arctic in the winter,\u201d said Mark Serreze, director of the snow and ice data center in Boulder. Photo In an Alaskan lake, bubbles of methane, a potent greenhouse gas, collect beneath the ice. Credit Josh Haner/The New York Times Scientists need better inventories of the ancient carbon. The best estimate so far was published in 2009 by a Canadian scientist, Charles Tarnocai, and some colleagues. They calculated that there was about 1.7 trillion tons of carbon in soils of the northern regions, about 88 percent of it locked in permafrost. That is about two and a half times the amount of carbon in the atmosphere.Philippe Ciais, a leading French scientist, wrote at the time that he was \u201cstunned\u201d by the estimate, a large upward revision from previous calculations. Advertisement Continue reading the main story \u201cIf, in a warmer world, bacteria decompose organic soil matter faster, releasing carbon dioxide,\u201d Dr. Ciais wrote, \u201cthis will set up a positive feedback loop, speeding up global warming.\u201d Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You will receive emails containing news content, updates and promotions from The New York Times. You may opt-out at any time. You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. You are already subscribed to this email. View all New York Times newsletters. See Sample Manage Email Preferences Not you? Privacy Policy Opt out or contact us anytime Opt out or contact us anytime Plumes of MethaneKatey Walter Anthony had been told to hunt for methane, and she could not find it.As a young researcher at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks, she wanted to figure out how much of that gas was escaping from lakes in areas of permafrost thaw. She was doing field work in Siberia in 2000, scattering bubble traps around various lakes in the summer, but she got almost nothing.Then, that October, the lakes froze over. Plumes of methane that had been hard to spot on a choppy lake surface in summer suddenly became more visible.\u201cI went out on the ice, this black ice, and it looked like the starry night sky,\u201d Dr. Walter Anthony said. \u201cYou could see these bubble clusters everywhere. I realized \u2014 \u2018aha!\u2019 \u2014 this is where all the methane is.\u201dWhen organic material comes out of the deep freeze, it is consumed by bacteria. If the material is well-aerated, bacteria that breathe oxygen will perform the breakdown, and the carbon will enter the air as carbon dioxide, the primary greenhouse gas. But in areas where oxygen is limited, like the bottom of a lake or wetland, a group of bacteria called methanogens will break down the organic material, and the carbon will emerge as methane.Scientists are worried about both gases. They believe that most of the carbon will emerge as carbon dioxide, with only a few percent of it being converted to methane. But because methane is such a potent greenhouse gas, the 41 experts in the recent survey predicted that it would trap about as much heat as the carbon dioxide would.Dr. Walter Anthony\u2019s seminal discovery was that methane rose from lake bottoms not as diffuse leaks, as many scientists had long assumed, but in a handful of scattered, vigorous plumes, some of them capable of putting out many quarts of gas per day. In certain lakes they accounted for most of the emerging methane, but previous research had not taken them into consideration. That meant big upward revisions were probably needed in estimates of the amount of methane lakes might emit as permafrost thawed.Most of the lakes Dr. Walter Anthony studies were formed by a peculiar mechanism. Permafrost that is frozen hard supports the ground surface, almost the way a concrete pillar supports a building. But when thaw begins, the ground sometimes turns to mush and the entire land surface collapses into a low-lying area, known as a thermokarst. A lake or wetland can form there, with the dark surface of the water capturing the sun\u2019s heat and causing still more permafrost to thaw nearby.Near thermokarst locations, trees often lean crazily because their roots are disturbed by the rapid changes in the underlying landscape, creating \u201cdrunken forests.\u201d And the thawing, as it feeds on itself, frees up more and more ancient plant debris. Advertisement Continue reading the main story One recent day, in 11-degree weather, Dr. Walter Anthony and an assistant, Amy Strohm, dragged equipment onto two frozen thermokarst lakes near Fairbanks. The fall had been unusually warm and the ice was thin, emitting thunderous cracks \u2014 but it held. In spots, methane bubbled so vigorously it had prevented the water from freezing. Dr. Walter Anthony, six months pregnant, bent over one plume to retrieve samples.\u201cThis is thinner ice than we like,\u201d she said. \u201cDon\u2019t tell my mother-in-law! My own mother doesn\u2019t know.\u201dDr. Walter Anthony had already run chemical tests on the methane from one of the lakes, dating the carbon molecules within the gas to 30,000 years ago. She has found carbon that old emerging at numerous spots around Fairbanks, and carbon as old as 43,000 years emerging from lakes in Siberia.\u201cThese grasses were food for mammoths during the end of the last ice age,\u201d Dr. Walter Anthony said. \u201cIt was in the freezer for 30,000 to 40,000 years, and now the freezer door is open.\u201dScientists are not sure yet whether thermokarst lakes will become more common throughout the Arctic in a warming climate, a development that could greatly accelerate permafrost thaw and methane production. But they have already started to see increases in some regions, including northernmost Alaska.\u201cWe expect increased thermokarst activity could be a very strong effect, but we don\u2019t really know,\u201d said Guido Grosse, another scientist at the University of Alaska, Fairbanks. He is working with Dr. Walter Anthony on precision mapping of thermokarst lakes and methane seeps, in the hope that the team can ultimately use satellites and aerial photography to detect trends.With this kind of work still in the early stages, researchers are worried that the changes in the region may already be outrunning their ability to understand them, or to predict what will happen.When the Tundra BurnsOne day in 2007, on the plain in northern Alaska, a lightning strike set the tundra on fire. Advertisement Continue reading the main story Historically, tundra, a landscape of lichens, mosses and delicate plants, was too damp to burn. But the climate in the area is warming and drying, and fires in both the tundra and forest regions of Alaska are increasing.The Anaktuvuk River fire burned about 400 square miles of tundra, and work on lake sediments showed that no fire of that scale had occurred in the region in at least 5,000 years.Scientists have calculated that the fire and its aftermath sent a huge pulse of carbon into the air \u2014 as much as would be emitted in two years by a city the size of Miami. Scientists say the fire thawed the upper layer of permafrost and set off what they fear will be permanent shifts in the landscape.Up to now, the Arctic has been absorbing carbon, on balance, and was once expected to keep doing so throughout this century. But recent analyses suggest that the permafrost thaw could turn the Arctic into a net source of carbon, possibly within a decade or two, and those studies did not account for fire.\u201cI maintain that the fastest way you\u2019re going to lose permafrost and release permafrost carbon to the atmosphere is increasing fire frequency,\u201d said Michelle C. Mack, a University of Florida scientist who is studying the Anaktuvuk fire. \u201cIt\u2019s a rapid and catastrophic way you could completely change everything.\u201dThe essential question scientists need to answer is whether the many factors they do not yet understand could speed the release of carbon from permafrost \u2014 or, possibly, slow it more than they expect.For instance, nutrients released from thawing permafrost could spur denser plant growth in the Arctic, and the plants would take up some carbon dioxide. Conversely, should fires like the one at Anaktuvuk River race across warming northern landscapes, immense amounts of organic material in vegetation, soils, peat deposits and thawed permafrost could burn.Edward A. G. Schuur, a University of Florida researcher who has done extensive field work in Alaska, is worried by the changes he already sees, including the discovery that carbon buried since before the dawn of civilization is now escaping.\u201cTo me, it\u2019s a spine-tingling feeling, if it\u2019s really old carbon that hasn\u2019t been in the air for a long time, and now it\u2019s entering the air,\u201d Dr. Schuur said. \u201cThat\u2019s the fingerprint of a major disruption, and we aren\u2019t going to be able to turn it off someday.\u201d Temperature Rising: Articles in this series focus on the central arguments in the climate debate and examine the evidence for global warming and its consequences. A version of this article appears in print on December 17, 2011, on Page A1 of the New York edition with the headline: As Permafrost Thaws, Scientists Study the Risks. Order Reprints| Today's Paper|Subscribe Continue reading the main story We\u2019re interested in your feedback on this page. Tell us what you think. Related Coverage Hunting for Clues to Global Warming DEC. 16, 2011 Frozen Carbon DEC. 16, 2011 GREEN BLOG Arctic Methane: Is Catastrophe Imminent? DEC. 20, 2011 Related Coverage Hunting for Clues to Global Warming DEC. 16, 2011 Frozen Carbon DEC. 16, 2011 GREEN BLOG Arctic Methane: Is Catastrophe Imminent? DEC. 20, 2011 What's Next Loading... Go to Home Page \u00bb Site Index The New York Times Site Index Navigation News World U.S. Politics N.Y. Business Tech Science Health Sports Education Obituaries Today's Paper Corrections Opinion Today's Opinion Op-Ed Columnists Editorials Op-Ed Contributors Letters Sunday Review Video: Opinion Arts Today's Arts Art & Design Books Dance Movies Music N.Y.C. Events Guide Television Theater Video: Arts Living Automobiles Crossword Food Education Fashion & Style Health Jobs Magazine N.Y.C. Events Guide Real Estate T Magazine Travel Weddings & Celebrations Listings & More Reader Center Classifieds Tools & Services N.Y.C. Events Guide Multimedia Photography Video NYT Store Times Journeys Subscribe Manage My Account NYTCo Subscribe Subscribe Home Delivery Digital Subscriptions Crossword Email Newsletters Gift Subscriptions Group Subscriptions Education Rate Mobile Applications Replica Edition Site Information Navigation \u00a9 2019 The New York Times Company Home Search Accessibility concerns? Email us at accessibility@nytimes.com. We would love to hear from you. Contact Us Work With Us Advertise Your Ad Choices Privacy Terms of Service Terms of Sale Site Information Navigation Site Map Help Site Feedback Subscriptions", "Thermokarst Lakes Water and Environmental Research Center (WERC) Institute of Northern Engineering - University of Alaska Fairbanks Menu Research Seminars People Prospective Students NIWR Alaska Stable Isotope Facility METAL WERC Thermokarst Lakes IPY: Understanding the impacts of permafrost degradation and thermokarst lake dynamics in the Arctic on carbon cycling, CO2 and CH4 emissions, and feedbacks to climate change Project Info Lead Researcher(s) Katey Walter Anthony (PI)UAF Institute of Northern Engineering Project Team Guido Grosse (Co-I)UAF Geophysical Institute Mary Edwards (Co-I)University of Southampton Lawrence Plug (Co-I)Dalhousie University Lee Slater (Co-I)Rutgers University Funding NSF IPY #0732735 Project Summary Research This research integrates field studies in a range of disciplines (geomorphology, geophysics, paleoecology, hydrology, limnology) with process modeling of permafrost thaw, lake formation, carbon cycling, and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions to understand how permafrost degradation in the Arctic, particularly thermokarst-lake evolution, affects long-term atmospheric trace gas dynamics by releasing ancient carbon (C) stored in permafrost as carbon dioxide (CO2) and methane (CH4). Map adapted from Guido Grosse, 2008. The overarching goals are to: describe comprehensively the state of thermokarst (permafrost degradation) in Siberia and Alaska quantify its impact on landscape configuration through the alteration of surface geomorphology and drainage patterns estimate its impacts on the C cycle via enhanced GHG (CO2, CH4) emissions, and examine its potential to influence global climate \u2014potential C release from thawing permafrost in Siberia alone totals >50% of the current atmospheric C burden. In the long term we will establish: a legacy of geographic, stratigraphic and process data from permafrost regions and data on thermokarst dynamics (past, present and future) a working model of thermokarst processes scenarios of thermokarst-GHG emissions driven by climate change from the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) to the year 2200, and an enhancement of collaborations within the Arctic Observing Network at observatories in North Siberia (Cherskii) and Alaska (Toolik Lake) This photo was taken from a helicopter in October 2003, flying over the forested tundra zone near Andrushkina, Russia. This is not far from the town of Cherskii in the Sakha Republic of Russia's Far East. It is a zone of continuous permafrost, and the landscape is covered by millions of thermokarst lakes releasing methane. This photo is a good example of how much of the land surface is covered by lakes in some regions of the Arctic. The majority of lakes emit large quantities of CH4. Photo by Katey Walter Anthony Partner Institutions Work will be an international collaborative effort with Bristol University (UK), the Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research and the Max Planck Institute for Microbiology (both Germany) and the Permafrost Institute, Yakutsk (Russia). The project is integrated with other IPY certified projects: \"Permafrost Observatories: Thermal State of Permafrost\", \"Arctic Circum-Polar Coastal Observatory Network\", and \"Carbon Pools in Permafrost Regions\". Thermokarst Background Thermokarst lakes dominate large areas of the Arctic land surface and may expand as permafrost continues to warm and thaw. We will explore a new frontier in polar science: the relation of thermokarst lakes to global climate change. The cross-disciplinary research will link process-based ecological and trace-gas flux measurements, geophysical field measurements, remote-sensing based observations, paleo-environmental analyses of permafrost and lake cores, and laboratory incubations of thawed permafrost soils and lake sediments in order to drive a quantitative model of CO2 and CH4 emissions from thermokarst lakes in Alaska and Siberia from the LGM to the present. Using permafrost characteristics, geomorphologic constraints and earth-system model-based projections of future climate change we will estimate CO2 and CH4 emissions from thermokarst lakes during the next 100-200 years \u2014 a positive feedback to climate change. Potential negative feedbacks (e.g. C-sequestration in lake bottoms) will also be taken into account. We will apply innovative geophysical methods along with paleo-techniques and carbon-cycling studies to understand the structure, function and evolution of thermokarst lakes. Geophysical and remote-sensing techniques will be used to explore possible CH4 emission from disintegrating CH4 hydrates and sub-permafrost free-phase CH4 associated with thermokarst-lake development. Our approach will establish a legacy of methodologies and data and lead to an understanding of the role of thermokarst lakes in climate change over millennial time scales. Resulting data will be archived and broadly available through the Geographical Information Network Alaska (GINA) and the Arctic Long-term Ecological Research database (LTER). Water and Environmental Research Center (WERC) Engineering Learning & Innovation Facility (ELIF) 1764 Tanana Loop PO Box 75 5910 Fairbanks, AK 99775-5910, USA phone (907) 474-7789 fax (907) 474-7041 nmisarti@alaska.edu The University of Alaska is an AA/EO employer and educational institution and prohibits illegal discrimination against any individual. Learn more about UA's notice of nondiscrimination. For technical issues regarding this website, please contact cem.web@alaska.edu.", "Thermokarst | geology | Britannica.com ENCYCLOP\u00c6DIA BRITANNICA START YOUR FREE TRIAL Log In \u00b7 Join Demystified Quizzes Galleries Lists On This Day Biographies Newsletters START YOUR FREE TRIAL Search Britannica What are you looking for? Search Click here to search Browse popular topics: Sugar Act Ash Wednesday Nullification crisis Liturgy of the Word K\u00f6ppen climate classification Bring fact-checked results to the top of your browser search. Learn More. Thermokarstgeology Written By: The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica See Article History Thermokarst, land-surface configuration that results from the melting of ground ice in a region underlain by permafrost. In areas that have appreciable amounts of ice, small pits, valleys, and hummocks are formed when the ice melts and the ground settles unevenly. The size and form of the features depends on the nature and extent of the ice. In general, regional thermokarst activity indicates an overall warming of the climate, whereas localized thermokarst forms may be caused by the movement of heavy vehicles or the construction of buildings over permafrost, the introduction of agriculture, or deforestation. Individual features have no characteristics that are exclusively due to thermokarst activity, and they are hard to distinguish from those formed by other means. Features resulting from the melting of dead glacial ice are not classified as thermokarst forms. This article was most recently revised and updated by John P. Rafferty, Editor. Learn More in these related Britannica articles: permafrost: Thermokarst formations The thawing of permafrost creates thermokarst topography, an uneven surface that contains mounds, sinkholes, tunnels, caverns, and steep-walled ravines caused by melting of ground ice. The hummocky ground surface resembles karst topography in limestone areas. Thawing may result from artificial or natural removal\u2026 More About Thermokarst1 reference found in Britannica articlesAssorted Referencespermafrost In permafrost: Thermokarst formations Article History Article Contributors Feedback Corrections? Updates? Help us improve this article! Contact our editors with your feedback. Thermokarst Quick Facts related topicsPermafrost Karst Edit Mode Thermokarst Geology Tips for Editing Leave Edit Mode Submit Tips For Editing We welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. You can make it easier for us to review and, hopefully, publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind. Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience. You may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered. Any text you add should be original, not copied from other sources. At the bottom of the article, feel free to list any sources that support your changes, so that we can fully understand their context. (Internet URLs are the best.) Your contribution may be further edited by our staff, and its publication is subject to our final approval. Unfortunately, our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions. Submit Thank You for Your Contribution! Our editors will review what you've submitted, and if it meets our criteria, we'll add it to the article. Please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors, and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed. Uh Oh There was a problem with your submission. Please try again later. Close Keep Exploring Britannica Volcano Volcano, vent in the crust of the Earth or another planet or satellite, from which issue eruptions of\u2026 Read this Article Democracy Democracy, literally, rule by the people. The term is derived from the Greek d\u0113mokrati\u0101, which was coined\u2026 Read this Article Marketing Marketing, the sum of activities involved in directing the flow of goods and services from producers\u2026 Read this Article View More Stay Connected Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Pinterest Newsletters About Us About Our Ads Partner Program Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use \u00a92019 Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica, Inc. Menu Home Demystified Quizzes Galleries Lists On This Day Biographies Newsletters Login Join Thermokarst geology Print Cite Share SHARE Facebook Twitter Feedback Feedback Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login). Select feedback type: Select a type (Required) Factual Correction Spelling/Grammar Correction Link Correction Additional Information Other Submit Feedback If you prefer to suggest your own revision of the article, you can go to edit mode (requires login). Thank you for your feedback Our editors will review what you\u2019ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. Join Britannica's Publishing Partner Program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work! Share SHARE Facebook Twitter Search \u00d7 close Britannica Celebrates 100 Women Trailblazers", "Thermokarst - Wikipedia Thermokarst From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search A land surface with very irregular surfaces of marshy hollows and small hummocks formed as ice-rich permafrost thaws Permafrost thaw ponds in Hudson Bay, Canada in 2008. Thermokarst is a land surface characterised by very irregular surfaces of marshy hollows and small hummocks formed as ice-rich permafrost thaws, that occurs in Arctic areas, and on a smaller scale in mountainous areas such as the Himalayas and the Swiss Alps. These pitted surfaces resemble those formed by solution in some karst areas of limestone, which is how they came to have karst attached to their name without the presence of any limestone. Small domes that form on the surface due to frost heaving with the onset of winter are only temporary features. They then collapse with the arrival of next summer's thaw and leave a small surface depression. Some ice lenses grow and form larger surface hummocks, which last many years and sometimes become covered with grasses and sedges, until they begin to thaw. These domed surfaces eventually collapse either annually or after longer periods and form depressions which contribute to uneven surfaces. These are included within the general label of thermokarst. The Batagaika crater in Siberia is an example of a large thermokarst depression. Contents 1 Thermokarst lakes 1.1 Life cycle 1.1.1 Initiation 1.1.2 Development/expansion 1.1.3 Drainage 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Thermokarst lakes[edit] A thermokarst lake, also called a thaw lake, tundra lake, thaw depression, or tundra pond,[1] refers to a body of freshwater, usually shallow, that is formed in a depression formed by thawing ice-rich permafrost.[2] A key indicator of thermokarst lakes is the occurrence of excess ground ice as well as having an ice content with greater than 30% by volume.[3] Continued thawing of the permafrost substrate can lead to the drainage and eventual disappearance of thermokarst lakes, leaving them, in such cases, a geomorphologically temporary phenomenon, formed in response to a warming climate.[4] Thermokarst lakes tend to form and disappear in a cyclical manner, resulting in a predictable life cycle (see \"life cycle\" below). These lakes are typically found in arctic and subarctic lowlands, including the western Canadian Arctic[5] (e.g. Banks Island, Victoria island), the Alaskan coastal plain,[6][7] interior Yukon territory [8] and the alluvial lowlands of northern Eurasia and Siberia.[9][10][11][12] The presence of thaw lakes in a region results in a thermal disturbance as the water warms the ground. The depth of permafrost below a lake will generally be shallower and if the lake is of sufficient depth, a talik is present. The general morphology (shape, depth, circumference) is variable, with some thaw lakes oriented, meaning they are generally elongated in a specific direction. Though their formation mechanism has not been definitively proven, it is believed to be related to the prevailing winds or storms.[13] The disturbance (of either nature) leads to overall warming and melting of ground ice, after which surface subsidence occurs allowing for water infiltration of either surface water or melted ground ice.[14] Life cycle[edit] Initiation[edit] The initiation of a thaw lake begins with the degradation of ice-rich permafrost. The natural inception of thermokarst lakes can be demarcated into two separate processes; whether in continuous or discontinuous permafrost. In continuous permafrost, water accumulates when ice veins and polygonal ground are present.[15] Through discontinuous permafrost, it is when thaw occurs in palsas (frozen peat cores) or in lithalsas (mineral core mounds).[16] Permafrost degradation is typically linked to a surface disturbance, either natural or artificial, in combination with site-specific factors, such as permafrost ice-content, ground temperature, etc.[17] Development/expansion[edit] Development of thaw lakes tends to be slow at first, but once the average lake bottom temperature exceeds 0\u00a0\u00b0C the lake ceases freezing to the bottom and thaw becomes continuous. The lake grows as ice thaws, which may result in the slumping of shorelines or submergence of vegetation, which is why thaw lakes in the boreal forest tend to be surrounded by \u201cdrunken trees\u201d.[18] It should be specified that \u201cdrunken trees\u201d (also known as drunken forests) occur within Yedoma regimes. This feature is not present throughout all thermokarst regions. Upon expansion in this stage, thermokarst lakes often take on an elongated shape with ordered alignment in the long axis.[19] If lakes form in an area of ice-rich permafrost, coalescence of several smaller lakes may occur, producing a larger body of water, magnifying the thermal disturbance. Development may be further facilitated by lateral bank erosion.[20] Additionally, thermal abrasion of thermokarst lake edges can expand the lake size, as well as lake bottom subsidence.[21] Additionally, oriented morphology of lakes can take on shapes such as \u201celliptical, egg-shaped, tri- angular, rectangular, clam-shaped, or D-shaped\u201d,[22] and commonly occur in terrain with sandy sediments.[23] Throughout the literature on orientation and morphology of thermokarst lakes, polemic scholastic discussions pertaining to how lake shape is developed are commonplace. However, Grosse et al. (2013) publication Thermokarst lakes, drainage, and drained basins summarizes endogenous and exogenous elements that are key factors in orientation including: redistribution of littoral shelves by wind creating insulation, arrangement of polygonal ice-wedges producing thawing, and erosion from fluvial channels causing inhomogeneous sediments. Clearly there is a multitude of reasonings to explain the shape of lakes, not just centred around wind movement. Drainage[edit] Before complete drainage, lake edges recede through retrogressive thaw slumping and subaerial debris flows. Actual drainage may be triggered by fluvial erosion or expansion of adjacent basins at inland locations. In coastal areas, drainage may be due to coastal retreat leading to thermal abrasion or erosion due to wave action. More gradual drainage (partial or complete) may be caused by local permafrost degradation and erosion.[24] Lakes stop growing once drainage initiated, and eventually depressions are filled by sediments, aquatic plants or peat. Another option for the fate of a drained thaw lake is that the active layer surrounding the lake deepens to below water level once ground ice is exhausted, allowing for a residual lake to remain.[25] The formation of permafrost thaw lakes due to warming climate is a positive feedback loop, as methane and carbon dioxide are released as permafrost thaws, contributing to further climate warming.[26] See also[edit] Arctic sea ice decline\u00a0\u2013 The sea ice loss observed in recent decades in the Arctic Ocean Alas\u00a0\u2013 A shallow depression formed by subsidence of the Arctic permafrost Deglaciation Pingo\u00a0\u2013 A mound of earth-covered ice References[edit] ^ Black, R.F (1969). \"Thaw depressions and thaw lakes; a review\". Biuletyn Peryglacjalny. 19: 131\u2013150. ^ Bucksch, Herbert. Dictionary Geotechnical Engineering. New York, Springer, 1997. ^ Grosse, G., Jones, B., Arp, C., 2013. Thermokarst lakes, drainage, and drained basins. In: Shroder, J. (Editor in Chief), Giardino, R., Harbor, J. (Eds.), Treatise on Geomorphology. Academic Press, San Diego, CA, vol. 8, Glacial and Periglacial Geomorphology, pp. 325\u2013353. ^ Phillips, M., Arenson, L.U., Springman, S.M. (2003). \"Permafrost\". In Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Permafrost, 21\u201325 July 2003, Zurich Switzerland: 660.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Mackay (1963). \"The Mackenzie Delta area\". Geographical Branch Memoir. 8: 202. ^ Hinkel, K. M., Frohn, R. C., Nelson, F. E., Eisner,W. R., Beck, R. A. (2005). \"Morphometric and spatial analysis of thaw lakes and drained thaw-lake basins in the Western Arctic Coastal Plain, Alaska\". Permafrost and Periglacial Processes. 16: 327\u2013342.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Sellmann, P.V., Brown, J., Lewellen, R.I., McKim, H. and Merry, C. (1975). \"The classification and geomorphic implications of thaw lakes on the Arctic Coastal Plain, Alaska\". COLD REGIONS RESEARCH AND ENGINEERING LAB HANOVER NH.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Burn, C. R., Smith, M.W. (1988). \"Thermokarst lakes at Mayo, Yukon Territory, Canada\". In Senneset, K., ed., Permafrost, Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Permafrost, 2\u20135 August 1988, Tapir Trondheim: 700\u2013705.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Dostovalov, B. N., Kudryavtsev, V. A. (1967). \"Obshcheye mierzlotovedeniya\". Moscow State University: 463.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Morgenstern, A., Grosse, G., Fedorova, I., Schirrmeister, L. (2011). \"Spatial analysis of thermokarst lakes and basins in Yedoma landscapes of the Lena Delta\". The Cryosphere. 5: 849\u2013867.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Romanovskii, N. N., Hubberten, H.-W., Gavrilov, A. V., Tumskoy, V. E., Tipenko, G. S., Grigoriev, M. N. (2000). \"Thermokarst and land\u2013ocean interactions, Laptev Sea region, Russia\". Permafrost and Periglacial Processes. 11: 137\u2013152.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Tomirdiaro, S. V., Ryabchun, V. K. (1978). \"Lake thermokarst on the Lower Anadyr Lowland\". In Permafrost: USSR Contribution to the Second International Conference, Yakutsk, USSR. Washington, DC, National Academy of Sciences: 94\u2013100.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ French, H.M. (2018). The periglacial environment. John Wiley & Sons Ltd. ^ Grosse, G., Jones, B. and Arp, C. (2013). \"Thermokarst lakes, drainage, and drained basins\".CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Czudek, T., & Demek, J. (1970). Thermokarst in Siberia and Its Influence on the Development of Lowland Relief. Quaternary Research, 1(1), 103-120. doi:10.1016/0033-5894(70)90013 ^ Luoto, M. and Sepp\u00e4l\u00e4, M. (2003), Thermokarst ponds as indicators of the former distribution of palsas in Finnish Lapland. Permafrost Periglac. Process., 14: 19-27. doi:10.1002/ppp.441 ^ Burn, C.R. and Lewkowicz, A.G. (1990). \"Canadian landform examples\u201017 retrogressive thaw slumps\". The Canadian Geographer. 34 (3): 273\u2013276.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Burn, C.R. and Lewkowicz, A.G. (1990). \"Canadian landform examples\u201017 retrogressive thaw slumps\". The Canadian Geographer. 34 (3): 273\u2013276.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ French, H. M. (2007). The periglacial environment. Retrieved from https://ebookcentral.proquest.com ^ French, H.M. (2018). The periglacial environment. John Wiley & Sons Ltd. ^ Romanovsky, V., Isaksen, K., Drozdov, D., Anisimov, O., Instanes, A., Leibman, M., McGuire, A.D., Shiklomanov, N., Smith, S., Walker, D. (2017). Changing permafrost and its impacts. In: C. Symon (Eds.), Snow, Water, Ice and Permafrost in the Arctic (SWIPA) (65-102). Oslo, Norway: Arctic Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP). ^ Grosse, G., Jones, B., Arp, C., 2013. Thermokarst lakes, drainage, and drained basins. In: Shroder, J. (Editor in Chief), Giardino, R., Harbor, J. (Eds.), Treatise on Geomorphology. Academic Press, San Diego, CA, vol. 8, Glacial and Periglacial Geomorphology, pp. 325\u2013353. ^ Grosse, G., Jones, B., Arp, C., 2013. Thermokarst lakes, drainage, and drained basins. In: Shroder, J. (Editor in Chief), Giardino, R., Harbor, J. (Eds.), Treatise on Geomorphology. Academic Press, San Diego, CA, vol. 8, Glacial and Periglacial Geomorphology, pp. 325\u2013353. ^ Grosse, G., Jones, B. and Arp, C. (2013). \"Thermokarst lakes, drainage, and drained basins\".CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Burn, C.R. and Lewkowicz, A.G. (1990). \"Canadian landform examples\u201017 retrogressive thaw slumps\". The Canadian Geographer. 34 (3): 273\u2013276.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ Van Huissteden, J., Berrittella, C., Parmentier, F.J.W., Mi, Y., Maximov, T.C. and Dolman, A.J. (2011). \"Methane emissions from permafrost thaw lakes limited by lake drainage\". Nature Climate Change. 1 (2): 119.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) External links[edit] New Scientist article UCAR press release vtePeriglacial environmentLandforms Blockfield Bratschen Cryoplanation terrace Glacial erratic Paha Palsa Periglacial lake Pingo Protalus rampart Rock glacier Strandflat Glaciokarst Thermokarst Patterned ground Frost boil Polygons Solifluction lobes and sheets Sorted stripe Stone ring Processes Cryoplanation Cryosuction Cryoturbation Fluvio-thermal erosion Frost heave Frost weathering Gelifluction Ice segregation Methane release Nivation Solifluction Syngenetic permafrost growth Zero-curtain effect Soils and deposits Active layer Gelisols Ice wedge Loess Peat Permafrost Stratified slope deposit Talik Yedoma Biomes and ecotones Arctic tundra Arctic tree line Antarctic oasis Antarctic tundra Montane grasslands and shrublands Alpine tundra Alpine tree line (Massenerhebung effect) Taiga (Drunken trees) Climate Alpine Polar Subpolar Category:Periglacial landforms Template:Glaciers Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thermokarst&oldid=883070911\" Categories: Periglacial landformsPatterned groundsPermafrostHidden categories: CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listArticles with short description Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces ArticleTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages \u0627\u0644\u0639\u0631\u0628\u064a\u0629Az\u0259rbaycanca\u0411\u0435\u043b\u0430\u0440\u0443\u0441\u043a\u0430\u044f\u0411\u0435\u043b\u0430\u0440\u0443\u0441\u043a\u0430\u044f (\u0442\u0430\u0440\u0430\u0448\u043a\u0435\u0432\u0456\u0446\u0430)\u200e\u010ce\u0161tinaDeutschEestiEspa\u00f1olFran\u00e7aisItaliano\u10e5\u10d0\u10e0\u10d7\u10e3\u10da\u10d8\u65e5\u672c\u8a9eO\u02bbzbekcha/\u045e\u0437\u0431\u0435\u043a\u0447\u0430PolskiPortugu\u00eas\u0420\u0443\u0441\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439\u0421\u0430\u0445\u0430 \u0442\u044b\u043b\u0430SuomiT\u00fcrk\u00e7e\u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0441\u044c\u043a\u0430 Edit links This page was last edited on 13 February 2019, at 03:10\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "The evolution of a thermokarst-lake landscape: Late Quaternary permafrost degradation and stabilization in interior Alaska USGS Publications Warehouse Skip to main content An official website of the United States government Here's how you know The .gov means it\u2019s official. Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing sensitive information, make sure you're on a federal government site. The site is secure. The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted securely. Menu USGS Publications Warehouse Explore Explore recent publications by USGS authors Browse all of Pubs Warehouse by publication type and year Documentation FAQs Web service documentation Other resources Descriptions of US Geological Survey Report Series Contact Search small Search The evolution of a thermokarst-lake landscape: Late Quaternary permafrost degradation and stabilization in interior Alaska Sedimentary Geology By: Mary E. Edwards,\u00a0Guido Grosse,\u00a0Benjamin M. Jones,\u00a0and\u00a0Patricia F. McDowell https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sedgeo.2016.01.018 Tweet Links More information: Publisher Index Page (via DOI) Open Access Version: External Repository Download citation as: RIS | Dublin Core Abstract Thermokarst processes characterize a variety of ice-rich permafrost terrains and often lead to lake formation. The long-term evolution of thermokarst landscapes and the stability and longevity of lakes depend upon climate, vegetation and ground conditions, including the volume of excess ground ice and its distribution. The current lake status of thermokarst-lake landscapes and their future trajectories under climate warming are better understood in the light of their long-term development. We studied the lake-rich southern marginal upland of the Yukon Flats (northern interior Alaska) using dated lake-sediment cores, observations of river-cut exposures, and remotely-sensed data. The region features thick (up to 40\u00a0m) Quaternary deposits (mainly loess) that contain massive ground ice. Two of three studied lakes formed ~\u00a011,000\u201312,000\u00a0cal\u00a0yr BP through inferred thermokarst processes, and fire may have played a role in initiating thermokarst development. From ~\u00a09000\u00a0cal\u00a0yr BP, all lakes exhibited steady sedimentation, and pollen stratigraphies are consistent with regional patterns. The current lake expansion rates are low (0 to <\u00a07\u00a0cm\u00a0yr\u2212\u00a01\u00a0shoreline retreat) compared with other regions (~\u00a030\u00a0cm\u00a0yr\u2212\u00a01\u00a0or more). This thermokarst lake-rich region does not show evidence of extensive landscape lowering by lake drainage, nor of multiple lake generations within a basin. However, LiDAR images reveal linear \u201ccorrugations\u201d (>\u00a05\u00a0m amplitude), deep thermo-erosional gullies, and features resembling lake drainage channels, suggesting that highly dynamic surface processes have previously shaped the landscape. Evidently, widespread early Holocene permafrost degradation and thermokarst lake initiation were followed by lake longevity and landscape stabilization, the latter possibly related to establishment of dense forest cover. Partial or complete drainage of three lakes in 2013 reveals that there is some contemporary landscape dynamism. Holocene landscape evolution in the study area differs from that described from other thermokarst-affected regions; regional responses to future environmental change may be equally individualistic. Study Area Additional publication details Publication type Article Publication Subtype Journal Article Title The evolution of a thermokarst-lake landscape: Late Quaternary permafrost degradation and stabilization in interior Alaska Series title Sedimentary Geology DOI 10.1016/j.sedgeo.2016.01.018 Volume 340 Year Published 2016 Language English Publisher Elsevier Contributing office(s) Alaska Science Center Geography Description 12 p. First page 3 Last page 14 Country United States State Alaska Online Only (Y/N) N Additional Online Files (Y/N) N DOI Privacy Policy | Legal | Accessibility | Site Map | Contact USGS U.S. Department of the Interior | DOI Inspector General | White House | E-gov | No Fear Act | FOIA", "Thermokarst Landforms | SpringerLink Skip to main content Skip to table of contents This service is more advanced with JavaScript available, learn more at http://activatejavascript.org SpringerLink Search SpringerLink Search Home Log in Encyclopedia of Planetary Landforms 2015 Edition | Editors: Henrik\u00a0Hargitai, \u00c1kos\u00a0Kereszturi Contents Search Thermokarst LandformsAuthorsAuthors and affiliationsRichard\u00a0SoareReference work entryFirst Online: 20 November 2015DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-3134-3_370How to cite Definition The term \u201cthermokarst\u201d can be understood in two ways, as a process or as a landform (Soare et al. 2008). As a process, \u201cthermokarst\u201d (on Earth) refers to the loss of thermal equilibrium (resulting from changes in temperature and/or pressure) and, consequently, of structural integrity in ice-rich permafrost, i.e., permafrost dominated by excess or massive ice (Washburn 1973; Harris et al. 1988; Summerfield 1991; French 2007). This occurs largely in areas of continuous permafrost (Washburn 1973; Harris et al. 1988; Summerfield 1991; French 2007). The loss of thermal equilibrium is induced by climate change, on a regional or global scale, and the subsequent deepening of the active layer. As a landform, \u201cthermokarst\u201d (on Earth) refers to the slump, fall or subsidence of ice-rich permafrost as it deflates or settles out in response to the loss of \u201cexcess\u201d ice in its pore space. If \u201cthaw\u201d related conditions are at work, then meltwater derived of the previously frozen pore-ice will... This is a preview of subscription content, log in to check access.ReferencesCostard FM, Kargel JS (1995) Outwash plains and thermokarst on Mars. Icarus 114:93\u2013112CrossRefGoogle ScholarFrench HM (2007) The periglacial environment. Wiley, West Sussex, p 458CrossRefGoogle ScholarHarris SA, French HM, Heginbottom JA, Johnston GH, Ladanyi B, Sego DC, van Everdingen RO (eds.) (1988) Glossary of permafrost and related ground-ice terms. Permafrost Subcommittee, National Research Council of Canada. Technical memorandum No 142Google ScholarLefort A, Russell PW, McEwen AS, Dundas CM, Kirk RL (2009) Observations of periglacial landforms in Utopia Planitia with the High Resolution Imaging Science Experiment (HiRISE). J Geophys Res 114:E04005. doi:10.1029/2008JE003264Google ScholarLefort A, Russell P, Thomas N (2010) Scalloped terrains in the Peneus and Amphitrites Paterae region of Mars as observed by HiRISE. Icarus 205(1):259\u2013268CrossRefGoogle ScholarMorgenstern A, Hauber E, Reiss D, van Gasselt S, Grosse G, Schirrmeister L (2007) Deposition and degradation of a volatile-rich layer in Utopia Planitia and implications for climate history on Mars. J Geophys Res 112(E6) CiteID E06010Google ScholarSeibert NM, Kargel JS (2001) Small-scale Martian polygonal terrain: implications for liquid surface water. Geophys Res Lett 28(5):899\u2013902CrossRefGoogle ScholarS\u00e9journ\u00e9 A, Costard F, Fedorov F, Gargani J, Soare RJ, Marmo C (2011a) Thermokarst degradation of potential ice-wedge polygons inside scalloped depressions in Utopia Planitia, Mars. 42nd Lunar Planet Sci Conf, abstract, #1904, HoustonGoogle ScholarS\u00e9journ\u00e9 A, Costard F, Gargani J, Soare RJ, Federov A, Marmo C (2011b) Scalloped depressions and small-sized polygons in western Utopia Planitia, Mars: a new formation hypothesis. Planet Space Sci 59(5\u20136):412\u2013422CrossRefGoogle ScholarSoare RJ, Osinski GR, Roehm CL (2008) Thermokarst lakes and ponds on Mars in the very recent (late Amazonian) past. Earth Planet Sci Lett 272:382\u2013393CrossRefGoogle ScholarSoare RJ, S\u00e9journ\u00e9 A, Pearce G, Costard F, Osinski G (2011) The Tuktoyaktuk Coastlands of northern Canada: a possible \u201cwet\u201d periglacial analog of Utopia Planitia, Mars. In: Garry WB, Bleacher JE (eds.) Analogues for planetary exploration, Geological Society of America Special Paper 483, pp 203\u2013218Google ScholarSoare RJ, Conway S, Costard F, Dohm JM, S\u00e9journ\u00e9 A (2012a). Climate change & the origin of ice-rich permafrost (segregation ice) in mid Utopia Planitia, Mars. In: Mars recent climate change workshop. Moffett Field, CaliforniaGoogle ScholarSoare RJ, Conway SJ, Pearce GD, Costard F (2012b) Ice-rich (NPLD) loess and the episodic formation of periglacial terrain in mid-Utopia Planitia, Mars. Lunar Planet Sci Conf XXXXIII:1311, HoustonGoogle ScholarSummerfield MA (1991) Global geomorphology. Pearson Education, Harlow, p 560Google ScholarUlrich MA, Morgenstern F, G\u00fcnther F, Reiss D, Bauch KE, Hauber E, R\u00f6ssler S, Schirrmeister L (2010) Thermokarst in Siberian ice-rich permafrost: comparison to asymmetric scalloped depressions on Mars. J Geophys Res 115:E10009. doi:10.1029/2010JE003640CrossRefGoogle ScholarWashburn AL (1973) Periglacial processes and environments. Edward Arnold, London, p 320Google ScholarCopyright information\u00a9\u00a0Springer Science+Business Media New York\u00a02015Authors and AffiliationsRichard\u00a0Soare1Email author1.Department of GeographyDawson CollegeMontrealCanada How to cite Cite this entry as: Soare R. (2015) Thermokarst Landforms. In: Hargitai H., Kereszturi \u00c1. (eds) Encyclopedia of Planetary Landforms. Springer, New York, NY .RIS Papers Reference Manager RefWorks Zotero .ENW EndNote .BIB BibTeX JabRef Mendeley About this entry First Online 20 November 2015 DOI https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-3134-3 Publisher Name Springer, New York, NY Print ISBN 978-1-4614-3133-6 Online ISBN 978-1-4614-3134-3 eBook Packages Earth and Environmental Science Buy this book on publisher's site Reprints and Permissions Search book Search within book Type for suggestions Table of contents Previous Page 66 Navigate to page number of 71 Next About this reference work Introduction Editors and affiliations Bibliographic information T Thermokarst Depression Thermokarst Landforms Thermokarstic Sinkholes Tholus (Mars) Tholus, Tholi Thrust Fault Thrust-Fault Scarp Th\u00fafur Thumbprint Terrain Tidal Plain Tick (Venus) Tiger Stripe Fractures (Enceladus) Till Clast Till Delta Tindar Tongue-Shaped and Arcuate Ridges Inside Depressions (Mars) Tool Marks Topographic Domains (Venus) Topple Transcurrent Fault Over 10 million scientific documents at your fingertips Switch Edition Academic Edition Corporate Edition Home Impressum Legal information Privacy statement How we use cookies Accessibility Contact us Springer Nature \u00a9 2018 Springer Nature Switzerland AG. Part of Springer Nature. Not logged in Not affiliated 75.166.229.92", "Horn Lake thermokarst: what happens when permafrost thaws? - YouTube Skip navigation Sign in Search Loading... Close This video is unavailable. Watch QueueQueueWatch QueueQueue Remove allDisconnect The next video is startingstop Loading... Watch Queue Queue __count__/__total__ YouTube TV - No long term contract Loading... Live TV from 60+ channels. No complicated set-up. No cable box required. Cancel anytime. Working... No thanks Try it free Find out whyClose Horn Lake thermokarst: what happens when permafrost thaws? Sarah Godsey Loading... Unsubscribe from Sarah Godsey? Cancel Unsubscribe Working... SubscribeSubscribedUnsubscribe8 Loading... Loading... Working... Add to Want to watch this again later? Sign in to add this video to a playlist. Sign in Share More Report Need to report the video? Sign in to report inappropriate content. Sign in Add translations 35,248 views 51 Like this video? Sign in to make your opinion count. Sign in 52 4 Don't like this video? Sign in to make your opinion count. Sign in 5 Loading... Loading... Rating is available when the video has been rented. This feature is not available right now. Please try again later. Published on Sep 7, 2010Sequential still images of a thermokarst (thawed permafrost) at Horn Lake in northern Alaska during the summer of 2010. For more information, see thermokarst.psu.edu Category Science & Technology Show more Show less Loading... Autoplay When autoplay is enabled, a suggested video will automatically play next. Up next 6 FOOT SNAKE GOES AFTER FAWN & FARM CAT INTERVENES!!! 06-10-18 - Duration: 10:28. Kapper Outdoors 2,940,007 views 10:28 MOST POWERFUL, RARE AND INTOXICATING IMAGES FROM THE PAST - Duration: 13:35. PERFECT LIFE 10,589,676 views 13:35 1968 Prophecy from a 90 Year Old Norwegian Woman - Duration: 7:16. Leanne Pirera & Angela Isard - Kingdom Reformers 5,794,624 views 7:16 NS 958 third and final attempt to pull the Poe wye. - Duration: 11:04. waltrail 1,241,258 views 11:04 178 videos Play all Landslides and Debris FlowsGreg wvdirtboy Easy Way to Remove Tree Stumps - Part 1 - Duration: 4:06. Marsh Rat 14,691,093 views 4:06 What will be the breaking point for the American people? - Duration: 14:33. preppernurse1 229,956 views 14:33 Tips & Tricks #1 - Poor Man's Filet Mignon - Duration: 12:10. Cooking With Jack Show 10,634,131 views 12:10 Permafrost thaw might be even more potent than we thought - Duration: 11:24. Climate State 51,160 views 11:24 Crash of Giant RC B 25 model from Ziroli plan - Maiden Flight disaster - Duration: 11:06. ScaleJetFred 2,871,576 views 11:06 Turn a ceiling fan into a wind turbine generator?! - Duration: 14:42. Giesbert Nijhuis 748,237 views 14:42 Bill Maher Is Served A Steaming Bowl Of Trump - Duration: 6:34. The Late Show with Stephen Colbert 2,923,438 views 6:34 17 Most Unreal Rock Formations - Duration: 7:46. Talltanic 5,011,958 views 7:46 POWERFUL FULL AFTERBURN Departure 3x Su-22 Fitters Polish AF; Volkel 2013 - Duration: 8:41. MrSoeberg 1,873,127 views 8:41 Nobel Laureate Smashes the Global Warming Hoax - Duration: 29:48. 1000frolly 1,649,946 views 29:48 8 Unreal Useful Machines You Need To See - Duration: 10:02. TOP 10 INFORMATION - TTI 815,240 views 10:02 Mother cow clearly asks man to rescue her newborn calf - Duration: 3:40. Rumble Viral 10,031,215 views 3:40 What Would Happen If All Ice On Earth Melted? - Duration: 11:41. Destiny 358,845 views 11:41 Shocking Magician Took Amanda's Bra!!! - Duration: 4:32. Kevas Music 46,685,467 views 4:32 Machining a Cube on a Lathe - Duration: 19:09. machiningmoments 1,183,270 views 19:09 Loading more suggestions... Show more Language: English Location: United States Restricted Mode: Off History Help Loading... Loading... Loading... About Press Copyright Creators Advertise Developers Terms Privacy Policy & Safety Send feedback Test new features Loading... Working... Sign in to add this to Watch Later Add to Loading playlists...", "Thermokarst - INTERACT Services Menu About Project Consortium People Pool of expertise Bulletin Board Field Sites Collaborations News Outreach Gallery Publications Glossary MEDIA INTERACT in Media GDPR Resources INTERACT presentation material Presentations Deliverables Meeting Minutes INTERACT newsletters Contact us Accessing the Arctic Accessing the Arctic Infrastructures TA/RA call TA User Community TA Ambassadors Info to User Groups Project Descriptions Publications Virtual Access Complaints TA/RA Data Protection Policy TA Office Managing stations Managing stations Meetings Handling data Arctic Awareness Coping with Change Managing risks Using Drones Tracking Biodiversity Thermokarst A landform that results when ground ice (ice-rich\u00a0permafrostPermafrost is frozen ground that remains at or below zero degrees Celsius (32 degrees Fahrenheit) for two or more years. It forms in regions where the mean annual temperature is... More) melts. The melting leaves small, marshy hollows and hummocks in the land as the ground settles unevenly. See also\u00a0thermokarst lakeA (usually shallow) body of water found in a depression within a\u00a0thermokarst\u00a0landform. The water is from thawed\u00a0permafrost. If the permafrost continues to thaw the lake may drain away, leaving a... More. Related contents > Spasskaya Pad Scientific Forest Station Field Sites STATION NAME AND OWNER The Spasskaya Pad Scientific Forest Station is owned and run by the Institute for Biological Problems of Cryolithozone (Siberian Branch of \u2026 > Read more > Barrow Arctic Research Center/Environmental Observatory Field Sites STATION NAME AND OWNER The Barrow ArcticDefinitions of the Arctic vary according to environmental, geographical, political, cultural and scientific perspectives. Some scientists define the Arctic \u2026 > Read more > Canadian High Arctic Research Station CHARS Field Sites STATION NAME AND OWNER The Canadian High\u00a0ArcticDefinitions of the Arctic vary according to environmental, geographical, political, cultural and scientific perspectives. Some scientists define the Arctic \u2026 > Read more > CEN Boniface River Field Station Field Sites STATION NAME AND OWNER The CEN Boniface River Station is owned and run by the Centre d\u2019\u00e9tudes Nordiques (CEN: Centre for Northern Studies) whose secretariat \u2026 > Read more > CEN Umiujaq Research Station Field Sites STATION NAME AND OWNER The Umiujaq Research Station is owned and run by the Centre d\u2019\u00e9tudes Nordiques (CEN: Centre for Northern Studies) whose secretariat is \u2026 > Read more > Numto Park Station Field Sites STATION NAME AND OWNER The Numto Park Station belongs to the UNESCO Chair on Environmental Dynamics and Climate ChangeAccording to the United Nations Framework Convention \u2026 > Read more > Khanymey Research Station Field Sites STATION NAME AND OWNER The Khanymei Research Station belongs to the National Research Tomsk State University, Russia. LOCATION The Station is located south-east or Yamal-Nenets \u2026 > Read more > Igarka Geocryology Laboratory Field Sites STATION NAME AND OWNER The Igarka Geocryology Laboratory is a scientific affiliation of the Melnikov PermafrostPermafrost is frozen ground that remains at or below zero \u2026 > Read more > Thermokarst lake Glossary A (usually shallow) body of water found in a depression within a\u00a0thermokarst\u00a0landform. The water is from thawed\u00a0permafrostPermafrost is frozen ground that remains at or below \u2026 > Read more Copyright 2017 \u00a9 Interact International Network for Terrestrial Research and Monitoring in the Arctic This site uses functional cookies and external scripts to improve your experience. My settingsAcceptGoogle AnalitycsPrivacy SettingsThis site uses functional cookies and external scripts to improve your experience. Which cookies and scripts are used and how they impact your visit is specified on the left. You may change your settings at any time. Your choices will not impact your visit. NOTE: These settings will only apply to the browser and device you are currently using. Google AnalitycsWe are using anonymously data to monitor visits and efficiency of our communications and report it periodically the EU. EnableSave my settings\u2715", "Thermokarst lake - INTERACT Services Menu About Project Consortium People Pool of expertise Bulletin Board Field Sites Collaborations News Outreach Gallery Publications Glossary MEDIA INTERACT in Media GDPR Resources INTERACT presentation material Presentations Deliverables Meeting Minutes INTERACT newsletters Contact us Accessing the Arctic Accessing the Arctic Infrastructures TA/RA call TA User Community TA Ambassadors Info to User Groups Project Descriptions Publications Virtual Access Complaints TA/RA Data Protection Policy TA Office Managing stations Managing stations Meetings Handling data Arctic Awareness Coping with Change Managing risks Using Drones Tracking Biodiversity Thermokarst lake A (usually shallow) body of water found in a depression within a\u00a0thermokarst\u00a0landform. The water is from thawed\u00a0permafrostPermafrost is frozen ground that remains at or below zero degrees Celsius (32 degrees Fahrenheit) for two or more years. It forms in regions where the mean annual temperature is... More. If the permafrost continues to thaw the lake may drain away, leaving a depression. Related contents > Barrow Arctic Research Center/Environmental Observatory Field Sites STATION NAME AND OWNER The Barrow ArcticDefinitions of the Arctic vary according to environmental, geographical, political, cultural and scientific perspectives. Some scientists define the Arctic \u2026 > Read more > Canadian High Arctic Research Station CHARS Field Sites STATION NAME AND OWNER The Canadian High\u00a0ArcticDefinitions of the Arctic vary according to environmental, geographical, political, cultural and scientific perspectives. Some scientists define the Arctic \u2026 > Read more > CEN Umiujaq Research Station Field Sites STATION NAME AND OWNER The Umiujaq Research Station is owned and run by the Centre d\u2019\u00e9tudes Nordiques (CEN: Centre for Northern Studies) whose secretariat is \u2026 > Read more > Numto Park Station Field Sites STATION NAME AND OWNER The Numto Park Station belongs to the UNESCO Chair on Environmental Dynamics and Climate ChangeAccording to the United Nations Framework Convention \u2026 > Read more > Khanymey Research Station Field Sites STATION NAME AND OWNER The Khanymei Research Station belongs to the National Research Tomsk State University, Russia. LOCATION The Station is located south-east or Yamal-Nenets \u2026 > Read more > Igarka Geocryology Laboratory Field Sites STATION NAME AND OWNER The Igarka Geocryology Laboratory is a scientific affiliation of the Melnikov PermafrostPermafrost is frozen ground that remains at or below zero \u2026 > Read more > Thermokarst Glossary A landform that results when ground ice (ice-rich\u00a0permafrostPermafrost is frozen ground that remains at or below zero degrees Celsius (32 degrees Fahrenheit) for two or \u2026 > Read more Copyright 2017 \u00a9 Interact International Network for Terrestrial Research and Monitoring in the Arctic This site uses functional cookies and external scripts to improve your experience. My settingsAcceptGoogle AnalitycsPrivacy SettingsThis site uses functional cookies and external scripts to improve your experience. Which cookies and scripts are used and how they impact your visit is specified on the left. You may change your settings at any time. Your choices will not impact your visit. NOTE: These settings will only apply to the browser and device you are currently using. Google AnalitycsWe are using anonymously data to monitor visits and efficiency of our communications and report it periodically the EU. EnableSave my settings\u2715", "thermokarst www.enacademic.com EN RU DE FR ES Remember this site Embed dictionaries into your website Academic Dictionaries and Encyclopedias All languagesAbkhazAdygheAfrikaansAinuAkanAlbanianAlsatianAltaicArabicAragoneseArmenianAromanianAsturianAymaraAzerbaijaniBagoboBashkirBasqueBelarusianBulgarianBuryatCatalanChechenCherokeeCheyenneChineseChuvashCircassianCreeCrimean Tatar languageCroatianCzechDanishDolganDutchEnglishErzyaEsperantoEstonianEvenkiFaroeseFinnishFrenchGeorgianGermanGreekGuaran\u00edHaitianHebrewHindiHornjoserbskaHungarianIcelandicIdioma urrumanoIndonesianIngushInupiaqIrishItalianJapaneseKabyleKarachayKazakhKhmerKlingonKomiKoreanKumykKurdishKyrgyzLadinoLatinLatvianLingalaLithuanianLojbanLuxembourgishMacedonianMalayManchuM\u0101oriMariMayaMokshaMongolianMycenaeanNahuatlNogaiNorthern SamiNorwegianOld Church SlavonicOld RussianOrokOssetianOttoman TurkishP\u0101liPanjabiPapiamentoPersianPolishPortugueseQuechuaQuenyaRomanian, MoldavianRussianSanskritScottish GaelicSerbianShorSilesianSlovakSloveneSpanishSumerianSwahiliSwedishTagalogTajikTatarThaiTibetan StandardTofalarTurkishTurkmenTuvanTwiUdmurtUighurUkrainianUrduUzbekVepsVietnameseWarayWelshYakutYiddishYorubaYupik All languagesAbkhazAdygheAfrikaansAinuAlbanianAlsatianAltaicArabicArmenianAvaricAymaraAzerbaijaniBashkirBasqueBelarusianBulgarianCatalanChamorroChechenCherokeeChineseChuvashCrimean Tatar languageCroatianCzechDanishDutchEnglishErzyaEsperantoEstonianEvenkiFaroeseFinnishFrenchGalicianGeorgianGermanGreekHaitianHebrewHindiHungarianIcelandicIdioma urrumanoIndonesianIngrianIngushIrishItalianJapaneseKarachayKazakhKhmerKlingonKoreanKumykKurdishLatinLatvianLingalaLithuanianMacedonianMalayMalteseM\u0101oriMariMayaMokshaMongolianNorwegianOld Church SlavonicOld RussianOssetianP\u0101liPanjabiPapiamentoPashtoPersianPolishPortugueseQuechuaQuenyaRomanian, MoldavianRussianSerbianShorSlovakSloveneSpanishSwahiliSwedishTagalogTajikTamilTatarThaiTurkishTurkmenUdmurtUighurUkrainianUrduUzbekVepsVietnameseVoticYakutYiddishYoruba Search! Geography glossary Interpretations Translations Books Geography glossary thermokarst InterpretationTranslation \ufeff thermokarst in periglacial areas, the melting of ground ice causes subsidence and creates a very uneven surface. Geography Dictionary & Glossary for Students \\\\ ITS Tutorial School (ITS) - Hong Kong. thalweg thermosphere Look at other dictionaries: Thermokarst \u2014 refers to a land surface that forms as ice rich permafrost melts. It occurs extensively in Arctic areas, and on a smaller scale in mountainous areas such as the Himalayas and the Swiss Alps. The name is given to very irregular surfaces of marshy\u2026 \u2026 \u00a0 Wikipedia Thermokarst \u2014 Als Thermokarst wird ein Landformungsprozess in Periglazialgebieten durch auftauende Dauerfrostb\u00f6den bezeichnet. Die urspr\u00fcngliche Herleitung des Begriffes Thermokarst kommt von der gewissen \u00c4hnlichkeit der entstehenden Landformen mit dem\u2026 \u2026 \u00a0 Deutsch Wikipedia thermokarst \u2014 \u25aa geology \u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0land surface configuration that results from the melting of ground ice in a region underlain by permafrost. In areas that have appreciable amounts of ice, small pits, valleys, and hummocks are formed when the ice melts and the\u2026 \u2026 \u00a0 Universalium Thermokarst \u2014 En g\u00e9omorphologie, le terme thermokarst (synonyme\u00a0: cryokarst) d\u00e9signe\u00a0: un model\u00e9 caract\u00e9ris\u00e9 par des d\u00e9pressions (par exemple, un alass) et des affaissements de terrain dus au tassement du sol cons\u00e9cutif de la fonte de la glace du\u2026 \u2026 \u00a0 Wikip\u00e9dia en Fran\u00e7ais Thermokarst \u2014 The\u0323rmokarst, \u00a0 Kryokarst, Pseudokarst, kessel oder rinnenartige, oft wassererf\u00fcllte Hohlformen an der Oberfl\u00e4che von Dauerfrostbodengebieten, bedingt durch das Auftauen von Eiskeilen und Eislinsen. Thermokarst wird oft durch anthropogene\u2026 \u2026 \u00a0 Universal-Lexikon thermokarst \u2014 noun /\u02cc\u03b8\u025c\u02d0(\u0279).m\u028a\u0259\u02c8k\u0251\u02d0(\u0279)st/ A region similar in appearance to karst topography, characterized by an irregular land surface, with bogs, pits, and other depressions, formed in areas of permafrost due to ice melting \u2026 \u00a0 Wiktionary thermokarst \u2014 \u00a0\u00a0\u00a01. A pitted periglacial or former periglacial surface in superficial deposits, produced by settling or caving of the ground after melting of ground ice [10]. \u00a0\u00a0\u00a02. A term applied to topographic depressions in karstic terranes resulting from\u2026 \u2026 \u00a0 Lexicon of Cave and Karst Terminology thermokarst \u2014 \u00a0\u00a0\u00a0Karst like topographic features produced in a permafrost region by local melting of ground ice and subsequent settling of the ground. \u00a0\u00a0\u00a0GG \u2026 \u00a0 Glossary of landform and geologic terms thermokarst \u2014 [ \u03b8\u0259:m\u0259(\u028a)k\u03b1:st] noun Geology a periglacial landscape resembling karst, resulting from the selective melting of permafrost \u2026 \u00a0 English new terms dictionary thermokarst \u2014 /\u02c8\u03b8\u025cmo\u028akast/ (say thermohkahst) noun an irregular land surface of marshes and hollows, as in areas where permafrost has melted. {thermo + karst} \u2026 \u00a0 Australian English dictionary 16+ \u00a9 Academic, 2000-2019 Contact us: Technical Support, Advertising Dictionaries export, created on PHP, Joomla, Drupal, WordPress, MODx. Mark and share Search through all dictionaries Translate\u2026 Search Internet Share the article and excerpts Direct link \u2026 Do a right-click on the link aboveand select \u201cCopy\u00a0Link\u201d We are using cookies for the best presentation of our site. Continuing to use this site, you agree with this. OK", "Katey Walter Anthony Water and Environmental Research Center (WERC) Institute of Northern Engineering - University of Alaska Fairbanks Menu Research Seminars People Prospective Students NIWR Alaska Stable Isotope Facility METAL Katey Walter Anthony Aquatic Ecosystem Ecologist | Associate Professor Water and Environmental Research Center (WERC) University of Alaska Fairbanks PO Box 755910 Fairbanks, AK 99775-5910 Phone: (907) 474-6095 Office: ELIF 348 kmwalteranthony@alaska.edu Research Outreach Experience Publications Multimedia Lab Group Education Grants, Scholarships and Awards More... Photos Projects Pan Arctic Lake Ice Methane Monitoring Network (PALIMMN) During the International Polar Year, Walter Anthony is working with a team of scientists, teachers, and enthusiastic citizens to establish a methane bubbling monitoring program, the Pan-Arctic Lake-Ice Methane Monitoring Network (PALIMMN), with an education and outreach component, Student-PALIMMN. Methane Gas Seeps: Potential Energy Source for Rural Alaska Villages The goal of this project is to evaluate the potential for environmentally responsible development of methane gas from seeps near remote Alaskan villages for local space heating and power generation. Research priorities include identifying and evaluating the quantity, quality, and location of natural seeps, as well as determining potential capture and transport mechanisms necessary for future resource development. This project is supported by an NSF EPSCoR Early Career Fellowship and the Department of Energy. Image above: Thermokarst lake near Cherskii, Russia. Photo by Katey Walter Anthony. Modeling Impacts of Icy Permafrost Degradation on Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Carbon Cycling in Thermokarst Lakes This NSF IPY #0732735 research project integrates field studies in a range of disciplines (geomorphology, geophysics, paleoecology, hydrology, limnology) with process modeling of permafrost thaw, lake formation, carbon cycling, and greenhouse gas emissions to understand how permafrost degradation in the Arctic, particularly thermokarst-lake evolution, affects long-term atmospheric trace gas dynamics by releasing ancient carbon stored in permafrost as carbon dioxide and methane. Intensive study regions are areas of the Yedoma Ice Complex in the Kolyma River Lowlands of Russia and the Seward Peninsula, Alaska. Lake Methane Ebullution The goal of this project is to estimate methane emissions from a variety of lake types in Alaska and Russia, with particular attention to the importance of thawing permafrost as a fuel for methane production. We map methane bubbling \"hotspots\" that come from various sources, not just thawing permafrost, including also decay of modern plants and seepage from geological reservoirs of methane. To date we have mapped over 50 lakes in Alaska and Russia. Using automated bubble traps, we monitor rates of methane bubbling from point sources and hotspots in lakes. Our goal is to understand the origins, magnitude and vulnerability for change of methane emissions from lakes. Remote Sensing Methane Ebullition Our goal is to develop a technique to quantify methane bubbling from lakes by linking remote sensing synthetic aperture radar (SAR) to ground surveys of methane bubbles trapped in lake ice for large-scale sampling within images to upscale quantification of regional and pan-arctic lake emissions. This work addresses the NASA Earth Science Enterprise Strategy's objectives of determining how global (aquatic) ecosystems are changing as permafrost warms and thaws enhancing methane emissions from expanding lands and how ecosystems respond to and affect global environmental change and the carbon cycle. Thermokarst lake near Cherskii, Russia. Katey Walter Anthony. NASA Assessing the Spatial and Temporal Dynamics of Thermokarst, Methane Emissions, and Related Carbon Cycling in Siberia and Alaska Thermokarst depressions and thermokarst lakes (TKLs) dominate large areas of the arctic land surface and may expand as permafrost continues to warm and thaw, releasing large quantities of methane (CH4) and carbon dioxide (CO2) to the atmosphere. We propose to define the relationship of TKLs to global climate change by developing remote sensing methods to quantify thermokarst and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from TKLs in regions (>1 million km2) of organic-rich, icy permafrost and ice-poor permafrost in Siberia and Alaska. We will use fine and broad scale remote sensing and field validation to determine the role of thermokarst as both a source (GHG release) and sink (peat accumulation) for carbon (C), thereby improving understanding of the behavior of a major C pool (icy permafrost) previously poorly considered in global C cycle sciences. Specifically, we will use remote-sensing based land cover classification and change detection to derive information about thermokarst distribution, initiation, and related changes in land surface properties to improve C-cycle and ecosystem models for Northern Hemisphere permafrost regions. We will test new satellite-based techniques: SAR data will be evaluated for upscaling field-measurements of CH4 bubbling from lakes to regional estimates of lake CH4 emissions through the establishment of a Pan-Arctic Lake-Ice Methane Monitoring Network (PALIMMN). By integration of our remotely sensed spatial data, information derived from multi-temporal satellite data (50 years), radiocarbon dated TKL sediment records (up to ~15,000 years old), and available and predicted climatic data, we will inform the sophisticated 2-D and 3-D numerical permafrost models of our collaborators for prediction of spatial and temporal thermokarst dynamics and related GHG emissions in scenarios for up to 200 years into the future as permafrost warms and thaws under global warming. AON Fluxes of carbon, water and energy are major regulatory drivers of the Arctic system, and form key linkages and feedbacks between land, ocean, and atmosphere. They are expected to change rapidly as climate warms. The goal of this IPY NSF project is to establish two long-term observatories at Toolik Lake Field Station in Alaska and the Northeast Science Station in Cherskii, Russia for year-round measurements of landscape-level carbon, water, and energy balance and to contribute to a pan-arctic network where coordinated measurements are made available in a unified database. In partnership with NOAA, we will measure CH4 concentrations on a 50-meter tall tower in Siberia and use a gradient technique to calculate CH4 flux. Data generated on the tower will contribute to the Global Monitoring Division of NOAA's Earth System Research Laboratory as part of a global greenhouse monitoring network that provides the long-term atmospheric observational basis for improving understanding of the global and North American carbon cycle. This work aims to reduce uncertainties on and improve estimates of CH4 emissions from northern high-latitude ecosystems, and to ensure our ability to detect increases in CH4 emissions resulting from climate change. The Polaris Project The Arctic is central to the global climate change issue, and Russia has by far the largest share of the Arctic. Yet few western scientists, much less students, ever get the chance to work in the Russian Arctic. The NSF POLARIS Project, a joint initiative between the Woods Hole Research Center, University of Alaska Fairbanks and the Northeast Science Station in the Sakha Republic of Russia, will train future leaders in arctic research and education, and inform the public; both tasks are essential given the rapid and profound changes underway in the Arctic in response to global warming. Improving Cold Region Biogas Digester Efficiency The goals of our two-phase project are to test and implement cold-adapted biogas digester technology in Cordova, a rural Alaskan community. Successful biogas technology would provide Alaskans with alternative cooking and heating fuel, offsetting fossil-fuel costs, reducing greenhouse gas emission, and minimizing organic waste in dumps. Currently in our first phase, we are experimenting with the relative efficiencies of mesophiles (conventional warm-loving digester microbes from manure) and psychrophiles (cold-loving microbes from thermokarst lake sediments) on common Alaskan household feedstock at various temperatures. The second phase will deploy digesters in practical household scale projects, operating appliances to evaluate feasibility and sustainability for widespread use in Alaska. The project is funded by a Denali Commission Emerging Energy Technology Grant, and is managed in partnership with the Cordova Electric Cooperative and the Cordova High School. We are also working with a separate grant from National Geographic Society and the Blackstone Ranch in association with engineer T.H. Culhane of the NGO Solar CITIES) to introduce the cold-adapted technology in the high altitudes and latitudes in Africa, Europe, and Asia. This grant includes community education and media coverage to broaden the social appeal of the digester technology. Community Involvement Whenever possible, Katey works to raise awareness about Arctic sources of methane and now they might be used to meet a community's research needs.\u00a0 She visits local communities, inviting students and other community members to increase their knowledge and become involved in her work. Here are some examples of projects that community members have been involved in: The Pan Arctic Lake Ice Methane Monitoring Network (PALIMMN) is conducting a major outreach operation to communities in Arctic. Methane Gas Seeps project Cold Region Biogas Digestor Project Katey welcomes media inquiries into her research and field work. Please contact her if you are interested in covering a story. Here are a few examples of external coverage: NBC, Changing Planet, http://www.nbclearn.com/climate/cuecard/52627 National Public Radio, Scientist Measures an Overlooked Greenhouse Gas BBC, Methane bubbles climate trouble National Geographic, Methane Belches in Lakes Supercharge Global Warming, Study Says Nature, Melting lakes in Siberia emit greenhouse gas Los Angeles Times, Bubbles of warming, beneath the ice Assistant Research Professor, Water and Environmental Research Center, Institute of Northern Engineering & International Arctic Research Center, University of Alaska, Fairbanks. Research on methane in the Arctic, lakes, biogeochemistry, climate change, permafrost/thermokarst, carbon cycling, isotopes. UA Presidential International Polar Year Postdoctoral Fellowship: March 2007-2010. Research on carbon and nutrient cycling in northern lakes with particular attention to permafrost dynamics and thermokarst processes in the Arctic. Research Program Manager, Oil Spill Recovery Institute, Prince William Sound Science Center, Cordova, Alaska. Research program development and management of annual and strategic plans for a grant program focused on oil pollution issues in arctic and sub-arctic aquatic ecosystems. 2006-07. Directed peer-review of research proposals and planned RFPs. Worked with Board members from the Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Trustee Council, two Regional Citizens\u2019 Advisory Councils, the Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation, and the North Pacific Research Board and Coastal Response Research Center, US Minerals Management Service, and SINTEF\u2019s Joint Industry Program. Served on the Oil Spill Response and Prevention Committee of the Prince William Sound Regional Citizens Advisory Council and am a member of the Advisory Board of the University of New Hampshire/NOAA\u2019s Coastal Research Response Center. Project Coordinator at the Northeast Science Station in Cherskii, Russia. Coordinated Russian-U.S. collaborations for the International Polar Year as part of an effort to network arctic observatories in Alaska and Russia for long term monitoring of climate change in cold regions. 2001-present. Radiocarbon Course, Keck AMS Facility UC Irvine, with E.A.G Schuur and S. Trumbore, 2007, Graduate Research Assistant with Dr. F. S. Chapin III, Institute of Arctic Biology. Field expeditions to remote field station in NE Siberia for 5-7 month periods each year during 2000-2004. I gained skills as a laboratory supervisor at Northeast Science Station in Cherskii, Russia. I assisted in organization of logistics for equipment and sample transport to NE Siberia from the United States. I conducted field sampling and laboratory analyses for aquatic and terrestrial long term monitoring program for my Ph.D. research and to facilitate other PI\u2019s at the NE Science Station. I supervised undergraduate students and field and lab technicians. I am fluent in Russian language. Isotope analyst in Radiocarbon Lab at University of Florida in collaboration with Dr. Ted Schuur. March 2004. Stable isotope analyses of gases, graphitization of CO2 for radiocarbon age dating of CH4 and peat. These were skills I learned during my Ph.D. work. Stable isotope analyst in Department of Oceanography at Florida State University with Dr. Jeffrey Chanton; Vacuum line procedures, isotope-gas chromatography/mass spectrometry of gases. 2004. These were skills I learned during my Ph.D. work. Geographical Information System (GIS) independent study project with Dr. Dave Verbyla using ArcView to analyze changes in Siberian lake area using MSS and ETM Landsat images. 2002. I learned some GIS skills during my Ph.D. work. Teaching assistant for Nutrient Cycling course in Natural Resource Management for undergraduate and graduate students with Dr. David Valentine, University of Alaska Fairbanks, Spring 2003. Visiting scientist at Max Planck Institute for Microbiology, Marburg Germany. Conducted laboratory incubations for methane production potential, isotope analyses, presentation, collaboration with Dr. Peter Frenzel. 2003, 2005, 2009. Stable Isotope Ecology Lecture and Laboratory Short Course at the University of Utah with Dr. J. Ehleringer, June 2002. Graduate Research Assistant in the Tahoe Research Group, UC Davis, 1998 to 2000. Masters thesis research on ecosystem effects of Eurasian watermilfoil (aquatic macrophyte) invasion at Lake Tahoe, CA-NV. Assessment of impact on lake water quality. Organization for Tropical Studies; graduate field study program in tropical biology, Costa Rica, 2000. Tahoe-Baikal Institute summers 1998, 1999. Project leader for US portion of program. Directed research on aquatic macrophytes and water quality at Lake Tahoe, CA. Limnology project leader at Lake Baikal, Siberia. Participant of the Lake Tahoe Yellow Cress GIS project, Lake Tahoe, CA. REU Research Assistant in Biogeochemistry Lab, University of Mass, Amherst Department of Geosciences. 1997-1998. Senior thesis project with Dr. Emily CoBabe tracing organic content of biomarkers in lake sediments from Alaskan lakes; use of GC and GC-MS. Summer Research Program at Geophysical Institute, University of Alaska, Fairbanks. Summer 1996. 40 hours per week. Research project in geochronology with Dr. Paul Layer using 40Ar/39Ar method and mass spectrometer to age-date volcanic samples from Chukotka Peninsula in Siberia. Publication pending. Lab Instructor, Mount Holyoke Geology Department. 1996. Teach lab section for Geology 100. CIEE Novosibirsk Summer for Students in the Natural Sciences. 1995. Studied abroad in Novosibirsk, Russia. Studied scientific Russian language and met with environmentalists to discuss current issues including the pollution of Lake Baikal. American Field Services (AFS), Study abroad in Krasnodar, Russia. 1992-93. Attend high school and university for Russian language, cultural study. Walter Anthony, K. M., P. Anthony, G. Grosse, J. Chanton. In press, 2012. Geologic methane seeps along boundaries of arctic permafrost thaw and melting glaciers, Nature Geoscience, DOI doi:org/10.1038/Ngeo1480. Brosius, L. S., K. M. Walter Anthony, G. Grosse, J. P. Chanton, L. M. Farquhar son, P. P. Overduin, H. Meyer. 2012. Using the deuterium isotope composition of permafrost melt water to constrain thermokarst lake contributions to atmospheric CH4 during the last deglaciation. J. Geophys. Res, 117, G01022, doi:10.1029/2011JG001810. Jones M. C., Grosse G., Jones B. M., Walter Anthony K M. (2012): Peat accumulation in a thermokarst-affected landscape in continuous ice-rich permafrost, Seward Peninsula, Alaska. J. Geophys. Res, 117, G00M07. doi:10.1029/2011JG001766. Kessler, M. A., L. Plug, K. Walter Anthony (2012), Simulating the decadal to millennial scale dynamics of morphology and sequestered carbon mobilization of two thermokarst lakes in N.W. Alaska, J. Geophys. Res., 117, doi:10.1029/2011JG001796. Sepulveda-Jauregui, A., K. Martinez-Cruz, A. Strohm, K. M. Walter Anthony, F. Thalasso. 2012, in press. New method for on-site measurement of dissolved gas in water using Infrared tunable diode laser absorption spectroscopy. Limnology and Oceanography Methods. Schuur, E. A. G., B. W. Abbott, and the Permaforst Carbon Network (W. B. Bowden, V. Brovkin, P. Camill, J. P. Canadell, F. S. Chapin III, T. R. Christensen, J. P. Chanton, P. Ciais, P. M. Crill, B. T. Crosby, C. I. Czimczik, G. Grosse, .J Harden, D. J. Hayes, G. Hugelius, J. D. Jastrow, T. Kleinen, C. D. Koven, G. Krinner, P. Kuhry, D. M. Lawrence, A. D. McGuire, S. M. Natali, J. A. O\u2019Donnell, C. L. Ping, A. Rinke, W. J. Riley, V. E. Romanovsky, A. B. K. Sannel, C. Sch\u00e4del, K. Schaefer, Z. M. Subin, C. Tarnocai, M. Turetsky, M. Waldrop, K. M. Walter Anthony, K. P. Wickland, C. J. Wilson, S. A. Zimov. 2011. High risk of permafrost thaw. Nature, 480, 32-33. doi:10.1038/480032a. Warwick F., I. L. Vincent, I. Laurion, R. Pienitz, K. M. Walter Anthony. 2012. Climate Impacts on Arctic Lake Ecosystems, In Global Impacts of Climate Change on Inland Waters (Eds: C.R. Goldman, M. Kumagai, and R.D. Robarts). Wooller, M. J., J. W. Pohlman, B. V. Gaglioti, P. Langdon, M. Jones, K. M. Walter Anthony, K. W. Becker, K. U. Hinrichs, M. Elvert. 2012. Reconstruction of past methane availability in an Arctic Alaska wetland indicates climate influenced methane release during the past ~12,000 years. Journal of Paleolimnology DOI 10.1007/s10933-012-9591-8. Walter Anthony, K. M. 2011. Methane: A menace surfaces. Physics of Sustainable Energy II: Using Energy Efficiently and Producing It Renewably, American Institute of Physics Conference Series, Eds. D. Hafemeister, D. Kammen, B.G. Levi, P. Schwartz,Vol. 1401, 470 pages. Grosse G, V. E. Romanovsky, T. Jorgenson, K. M. Walter Anthony, J. Brown J, P. P. Overduin. 2011. Vulnerability and feedbacks of arctic permafrost to climate change. EOS Trans. AGU, 9(1), 73-74. Isaksen, I. S. A., M. Gauss, G. Myhre, K. M. Walter Anthony, C. Ruppel. 2011. Strong atmospheric chemistry feedback to climate warming from Arctic methane emissions, Global Biogeochem. Cycles, 25, GB2002, doi:10.1029/2010GB003845. Jones, B. M., G. Grosse, C. D. Arp, M. C. Jones, K. M. Walter Anthony,V. E. Romanovsky. 2011. Modern thermokarst lake dynamics in the continuous permafrost zone, northern Seward Peninsula, Alaska, J. Geophys. Res., 116, G00M03, doi:10.1029/2011JG001666. Parsekian, A. D., B. M. Jones, M. C. Jones, G. Grosse, K. M. Walter Anthony, L. Slater. 2011. Expansion rate and geometry of floating vegetation mats on the margins of thermokarst lakes, northern Seward Peninsula, Alaska, USA. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms, 36(14), 1889-1897. doi:10.1002/esp.2210. Prowse, T., K. Alfredsen, S. Beltaos, B. R. Bonsal, W. B. Bowden, C. R. Duguay, A. Korhola, J. McNamara, W. F. Vincent, V. Vuglinsky, K. M. Walter Anthony, G. A. Weyhenmeyer. 2011. Effects of changes in arctic lake and river ice. Ambio. 40:63\u201374 DOI 10.1007/s13280-011-0217-6. Walter Anthony, K. M., D. Vas, L. Brosius, F. S. Chapin III, S. A. Zimov, Q. Zhuang. 2010. Estimating methane emissions from northern lakes using ice bubble surveys. Limnology and Oceanography Methods 8, 592\u2013609. Walter Anthony, K. 2009. Arctic Climate Threat--Methane from Thawing Permafrost. Scientific American. December 7, 2009. Walter, K., L. Brosius, 2009. Sheep Creek haw pond: Thermokarst lakes and methane emissions, Ninth International Conference on Permafrost, Field Trip Guide Book, Fairbanks Alaska, USA. Walter, K., D. Vas, 2009. Thermokarst and Drunken Forest. Ninth International Conference on Permafrost, Field Trip Guide Book, Fairbanks Alaska, USA. Edwards M., K. Walter, G. Grosse, L. Plug, L. Slater, P. Valdes. 2009. Arctic thermokarst lakes and the carbon cycle. PAGES News, 17(1), 16-18. Wooller, M. J., C. Ruppel, J. W. Pohlman, M. B. Leigh, M. Heintz, K. M. Walter Anthony. 2009. Permafrost gas hydrates and climate change; lake-based seep studies on the Alaskan North Slope: Fire in the Ice (U.S. Department of Energy, National Energy Technology Laboratory Methane Hydrate Newsletter), summer 2009, p. 6-9 [http://www.netl.doe.gov/technologies/oil-gas/FutureSupply/MethaneHydrates/newsletter/newsletter.htm]. Zhuang, Q., J. M. Melack, S. Zimov, K. M. Walter, C. L. Butenhoff, M. A. K. Khalil. 2009. Global Methane Emissions From Wetlands, Rice Paddies, and Lakes, EOS, Transactions, American Geophysical Union, 90 (5), 37-44. Walter, K. M., J. P. Chanton, F. S. Chapin, III, E. A. G. Schuur, and S. A. Zimov, 2008. Methane production and bubble emissions from arctic lakes: Isotopic implications for source pathways and ages, J. Geophys. Res., 113, G00A08,doi:10.1029/2007JG000569. Walter, K. M., M. Engram, C. Duguay, M. Jeffries, F. S. Chapin III. 2008. The potential use of synthetic aperture radar (SAR) for estimating methane ebullition from arctic lakes, Journal of the American Water Research Association, 44(2), 305-315. Chanton, J.P., K. M. Walter. Siberian Permafrost Decomposition, Arctic Lakes and Carbon. Development and Transition. Published by the United Nations Development Programme and the London School of Economics and Political Science, June, 2008. www.developmentandtransition.net Corell, R.W., S. J. Hassol, J. M. Melillo, D. Archer, E. Euskirchen, F. S. Chapin III, A. D. McGuire, T. R. Christensen, V. P. Fichelet, K. Walter, Q. Zhuang, T. Callaghan, S. Bech, C. McMullen. 2008. Methane from the Arctic: Global warming wildcard. In: UNEP Year Book 2008 (edited by P. Harrison), pp 37-48. United Nations Environment Programme, Nairobi, Kenya. Grosse, G. V. Romanovsky, K. Walter, A. Morgenstern, H. Lantuit, S. Zimov. 2008. Thermokarst Lakes: High-Resolution Distribution and Temporal Changes at Three Yedoma Sites in Siberia, Proceedings from the Ninth International Conference on Permafrost, 551-556. Walter, K. M., M. Edwards, G. Grosse, S. A. Zimov, F. Stuart Chapin III, 2007. Thermokarst lakes as a source of atmospheric CH4 during the last deglaciation. Science 318, 633-636. Walter, K. M., L. C. Smith, F. S. Chapin III. 2007. Methane bubbling from northern lakes: present and future contributions to the global methane budget, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, vol. 365, N. 1856: 1657-1676. Lopez, B., N. I., Shilomanov, F. E. Nelson, K. Walter, B. Hallet, R. S. Sletten. 2007. A Threatening Thaw. National Geographic Magazine. December issue. Pp. 137-154. Romanovsky, V., K. Walter, K. et al. Ice in the Ground, Chapter 4 in The Global Outlook for Ice & Snow, Center for International Climate and Environmental Research (CICERO) and UNEP, 2007. Walter, K. M., S. A. Zimov, J. P. Chanton, D. Verbyla, F. S. Chapin III. 2006 Methane Bubbling from Siberian Thaw Lakes as a Positive Feedback to Climate Warming, Nature 443, 71-75. Corradi C.A.R., K. Walter, O. Kolle, S. A. Zimov, E-D. Schulze. 2005. Carbon dioxide and methane exchange of a north-east Siberian tussock tundra. Global Change Biology 11, 1910-1925. In Revision (near publication) Engram, M., K. M. Walter Anthony, F. J. Meyer, G. Grosse. Investigating synthetic aperture radar (SAR) backscatter response from ice on thermokarst lakes, as an indicator of methane ebullition bubbles, on the Seward Peninsula, Alaska, USA. Canadian Journal of Remote Sensing. Walter Anthony K. M., P. Anthony. Constraining spatial variability of methane ebullition in thermokarst lakes using point-process models. Journal of Geophysical Research \u2013 Biogeosciences. Articles in Preparation Farquharson, L.M., K. M. Walter Anthony, N. H. B. Bigelow, G. Grosse, M. E. Edwards, J. E. Beget. Sedimentology of thermokarst lakes forming in yedoma on the northern Seward Peninsula, Alaska. Quaternary Science Reviews. Geai, M. L., K. M. Walter Anthony, G. Grosse, D. Verbyla. Quantifying methane ebullition from an interior Alaska thermokarst lake using aerial photography. Journal of Geophysical Research \u2013 Biogeosciences. Grosse, G., B. Jones, K. M. Walter Anthony. (in preparation for resubmission). Application of airborne LIDAR for mapping permafrost-related land surface features and processes in an Arctic lowland, NW Alaska. Earth Surface Processes and Landforms. Grosse, G., B. Jones, K. M. Walter Anthony, L. Plug, V. Romanovsky. A temporally high-resolution lake drainage dataset from ice-rich permafrost lowlands on the Seward Peninsula, NW Alaska, for 1950-2008. Remote Sensing of Environment. Grosse, G., K. M. Walter Anthony et al. Distribution and characteristics of thermokarst lakes in the Arctic and estimates of methane emissions. Journal of Geophysical Research \u2013 Biogeosciences. Jones, M. C., K. M. Walter Anthony, G. Grosse. New estimates for northern high latitude peatland and thermokarst lake methane emissions during deglaciation. Journal of Geophysical Research \u2013 Biogeosciences. Martinez-Cruz, K., A. Sepulveda-Jauregui, Y. Belmonte, R. Gonz\u00e1lez, N. Vargas-Gonz\u00e1lez, K. M. Walter Anthony, F. Thalasso. Temperature dependence of methanogenesis and methanotrophy in arctic, temperate and tropical lakes. Limnology and Oceanography. Sepulveda-Jauregui, A., K. Martinez-Cruz, A. Strohm, K. M. Walter Anthony, F. Thalasso, CH4 cycling in arctic lakes: methanogenesis and methanotrophy. Hydrobiologia. Sepulveda-Jauregui, A. K. M. Walter Anthony, F. Thalasso. Anaerobic methane oxidation coupled to sulfate reduction and denitrification in arctic lakes. Environmental Science and Technology. Strohm, A. J., K. M. Walter Anthony, F. Thalasso, F. Seasonality of methane emissions from an interior Alaska thermokarst lake. Limnology and Oceanography. Walter Anthony, K. M. and G. Grosse. Decrease in landscape methane emissions: An alternate trajectory of thermokarst on the northern Seward Peninsula, Alaska, Ecological Applications. Walter Anthony, K. M., G. Grosse, M. Engram, P. Anthony. Methane emissions from 50 years of thermokarst in Alaskan lakes. Journal of Geophysical Research \u2013 Biogeosciences. Walter Anthony, K. M., S. A.. Zimov, M. Jones, P. Anthony, G. Grosse. Permafrost thaw: A long-term carbon sink. Nature. Vas, D.A., K. M. Walter Anthony, R. Barry, P. Anthony. Understanding the plumbing of methane ebullition seeps in interior Alaska thermokarst-lake sediments from high temporal resolution seep monitoring, Limnology and Oceanography. Videos The videos below show phenomena associated with methane release in lakes. This video, recorded 2009, on a lake near Fairbanks, shows Walter Anthony and a research team drilling a hole through lake ice, then lighting the escaping methane. This video was shot by Megan Otts and Todd Paris of UAF Marketing and Communications. This video shows a large plume of methane-rich gas continuously bubbling in a tundra lake in Alaska. In the background is a rubber raft used by researchers to explore field sites and collect data. Katey Walter Anthony made this recording in the summer of 2007. This video shows a researcher burning a plume of methane-rich gas as it bubbles up through the water of a tundra lake in Alaska. Researchers visit winter field sites, cut the ice over the plume (which was located during the summer field season), and light the escaping gas. The steady flames indicate the presence of the methane. Walter made this recording in the spring of 2008. At the end of the end, the video pans out to show a larger view of the lake and the research team. Appearing are (left to right) Melissa Smith, Dennis Witmer, Paul Bodfish, and Thomas Ahmakak Itta. This video, taken in January 2008 (by Peter Anthony), shows Katey Walter opening thin ice overlying the methane seep at Atqasuk. High rates of bubbling prevent thick ice from forming, and gas escapes from the seep year-round to the atmosphere through cracks in the ice. This video was shot under the lake ice in April 2008 (by Dennis Witmer). It shows the ice-free cavern generated by a violent bubbling plume that is active year-round. The milk jug frozen in place is a buoy, anchored to the lake bottom for seep location identification in summertime. Here it gives an idea of the scale of the cavern. The event as Described by Dennis Witmer: \"The seep flows so strongly that it disrupts the normal ice formation on this lake. The ice on the lake was about four feet thick, but directly over the seep, the ice was only about a foot thick and porous. We made a hole over the top of the seep to make some measurements, but noted that every time we took ice or water out of the hole that the level dropped -- not what you would expect from floating ice. From this we deduced that the seep must have made a dome in the ice, with ice frozen to the bottom along the edges, but forming a dome of thinner ice over the seep. We then deliberately removed about 200 gallons of water (we counted 40 five-gallon buckets full) and discovered that we had dropped the water level about 16 inches from the top of the ice. I then took my digital camera in movie mode and made the video. The seep can be seen with the vigorous bubbling of the water. You can also see a white plastic milk jug frozen to the top. This was a float that Katey had used to mark the seep last summer so she could easily find it from the air. I shot only a few seconds of video before I lost my nerve; I realized that the chamber in the top of the dome was a mixture of air and methane and could have been an explosive mixture -- I didn't want to ignite the mixture from a spark from the camera.\" Graduate Students Laura Brosius Melanie Jane Engram Louise Farquharson Dragos Vas Research Associates Peter Anthony Laurel McFadden Laura Oxtoby Amy Strohm Post Docs Miriam Jones University of Alaska, Fairbanks, Ph.D., May 2006. Department of Biology and Wildlife. Advisor: Dr. F. Stuart Chapin III. G.P.A.: 4.0. Dissertation: Methane emissions and biogeochemistry of North Siberian thermokarst lakes. 2006 1st place winner of the United States Council of Graduate Schools/ University Microfilms International Distinguished Dissertation Award in the field of Mathematics, Physical Sciences and Engineering. University of California, Davis, M.Sc. Restoration Ecology. August, 2000. Department of Environmental Studies and Policy. Major Advisor: Dr. Charles Goldman. G.P.A.: 3.96. Thesis: Ecosystem effects of the invasion of Eurasian watermilfoil (Myriophyllum spicatum) at Lake Tahoe, CA-NV. Mount Holyoke College, Bachelor of Arts, 1998. High Honor in Geology. Magna cum Laude. Major: Biogeochemistry Minor: Russian Studies G.P.A.: 3.94. Honors Thesis: \"Organic Geochemical Analysis of Biomarkers from Birch Lake, Alaska\". Edinburgh University, Scotland. Study abroad 1996-97. Geology, ecology, and field courses. Novosibirsk State University, Russia. Summer 1995. Scientific Russian Language. Portland State University, Oregon. 1993-94. Russian Language 411, 412, 413. Kuban State University, Krasnodar, Russia. 1992-93. Russian language and culture. NSF 09-538 Hydrologic Sciences. Co-PI K. Walter Anthony, PI R. Daanen, Water and methane dynamics in thermokarst lakes near Fairbanks, Alaska, Jan. 2013-Dec. 2015. PENDING. NSF OPP #1107892. Co-PI K. Walter Anthony, PI Syndonia Bret-Harte. AON, Collaborative Research on Carbon, Water, and Energy Balance of the Arctic Landscape at Flagship Observatories in Alaska and Siberia. July 2011- June 2014. FUNDED. DOE. PI K. Walter Anthony. Collaborative Research: Quantifying Climate Feedbacks of the Terrestrial Biosphere under Thawing Permafrost Conditions in the Arctic, Sep 2011-Aug. 2014. FUNDED. NASA Roses NNX11AH20G. PI K. Walter Anthony, Co-PIs G. Grosse, F. Meyer. Characterization of CH4 emissions from high latitude lakes in North America using multi-scale remote sensing, June 2011- May 2014. FUNDED. Collaborative Proposal to Lehigh University/NSF. Postdoc support for Miriam Jones. Impacts of climate seasonality on carbon accumulation and methane emissions of Alaskan ecosystems during the Holocene Thermal Maximum. $38,254. July 2010-Jan. FUNDED Denali Commision. 2009 Emerging Energy Technology Grant. Improving Cold Region Biogas Digestor Efficiency. PI: Katey Walter Anthony, collaboration with Cordova Electric Cooperative, Clay Koplin. Blackstone Ranch Institute Innovation Challenge Grant, National Geographic Society, 2009. Improving cold season biogas digestor efficiency for global energy solutions. PI: K. Walter Anthony. WINGS WorldQuest 2011 Elected Fellow. http://explore.wingsworldquest.org/node/722 National Geographic Society Early Explorers, awarded Feb. 2009, biographical article in NGS Magazine about scientist and her research.http://www.nationalgeographic.com/field/explorers/walter-katey-09.html National Wildlife Federation: National Conservation Achievement Award in Science for 2009, presented November 2009, Washington DC Mount Holyoke College Alumnae Association Mary Lyon Award, 2010. DOE Methane Hydrates 2008. Funding Opportunity: DOE #DE-NT0005665. Title: Source characterization and temporal variation of methane seepage from thermokarst lakes on the Alaska North Slope in response to arctic climate change. PI: Matthew Wooller, Katey Walter et al. NASA: Proposed project: Astrobiology of Icy Worlds: Habitability, Survivability, and Detectability. PI: Katey Walter Submitted April 2008. September 2008-August 2013. DOE Climate Change Prediction Program: Abrupt Climate Change Modeling Opportunity # DE-PS02-08ER08-05. Project: Quantifying Climate Feedbacks from Abrupt Changes in High-Latitude Trace-Gas Emissions. PI Walter. NSF EPSCoR Early Career Fellowship, Project: Methane availability as a function of permafrost vulnerability and vegetation, PI Katey Walter Jan.-Aug. 2008. FUNDED NASA #NNX08AJ37G: Assessing the spatial and temporal dynamics of thermokarst, methane emissions, and related carbon cycling in Siberia and Alaska; G. Grosse, K. Walter, V. Romanovsky NSF IPY #0732735: \"IPY: Understanding the impacts of permafrost degradation and thermokarst lake dynamics in the Arctic on carbon cycling, CO2 and CH4 emissions, and feedbacks to climate change\", PI Dr. K. Walter et al. NSF IPY #0732533: \"IPY ISE: Polaris Project: Rising Stars in the Arctic, Dr. K. Walter et al. UA Presidential International Polar Year Postdoctoral Fellowship Ecological Society of America 2006 most notable publication Young Scientist IASC Scholarship for Arctic Council AMAP, 2007 United States Council of Graduate Schools/ UMI Distinguished Dissertation 1st Place Award in Science, Math and Engineering 2006 NASA Earth Systems Science Fellowship 2003-05 Global Change Grant, IARC, 2001, 2002 EPA Star Fellowship, 2000-2002 UC Davis Graduate Mentorship Fellowship, 1999 Leopold Schepp Fellowship, 1999 Sigma Xi, 1998 ARCS Scholarship, 1998, 1999 Morris K. Udall Scholarship, 1996, 1997. A. Elizabeth Adams Fellowship, 1998 New Eight Scholar-Athlete, 1995, 1997 Claire Bates Davidson Scholarship, 1998 Sarah Williston Scholar, 1996 Rhodes Scholarship finalist, 1998 Barry M. Goldwater Scholarship, 1996 Seven Sisters Scholar Athlete, 1998 National Security Education Program Scholarship for study in Russia, 1995 Phi Beta Kappa, 1998 Mildred L. Sanderson Prize in Math, 1995 Peer reviews Manuscript reviews for refereed journals in recent years: Journal of Geophysical Research-Biogeosciences, Journal of Geophysical Research-Atmospheres, Global Biogeochemical Cycles, Science, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, Aquatic Botany, NICOP, UNEP. Science, Journal of Geophysical Research-Biogeosciences, Journal of Geophysical Research-Atmospheres, Biogeochemistry, JAWRA, Limnology & Oceanography: Methods, Global Biogeochemical Cycles, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, Aquatic Botany, NICOP, UNEP, PLoS ONE. Proposal reviewer for the National Science Foundation, ALW Klimaatvariabiliteit; NOAA Climate Program Office, Global Carbon Cycle Program; Royal Society of New Zealand Marsden Fund. Graduate & undergraduate students, postdocs Miriam Jones (Postdoc) Mark Kessler (Postdoc) Prajna Regmi (Ph.D. remote sensing methane) Laura Brosius (M.Sc. isotopes and organic chemistry of methane production in arctic lakes) Dragos Vas (M.Sc. methane ebullition dynamics) Melanie Engram (M.Sc. satellite remote sensing of methane bubbles in lake ice) Louise Farquharson (M.Sc. paleoenvironment of thermokarst lake sediments) Armando Sepulveda Jauregui (PhD methane cycling in global lakes) Benjamin Jones (Ph.D.) Sudipta Sarkar (M.S.) Allen Phelps (Ph.D.) Joanne Heslope (M.Sc.) Desmond Johns (UAF, senior thesis) Dan Nidzgorski and Erin Carr (REU\u2019s) Dmitri Draluk (trained local resident of Cherskii, Russia to monitor methane in lakes). 2005-present. High School Students: 2007 Science symposium: Mentor to Nic Covell, West Valley High School, 3rd place winner; 2008 Katie Sparks, West Valley High School; Visiting research fellows: Frans-Jan Parmetier (from Netherlands Oct.-Nov. 2008); Marie Laure Geai, French Fulbright Fellow 2009-10. Other skills Fluency in Russian language; translator; professional travel through Russia and Former Soviet Union, running, skiing, mountaineering, cello. Permafrost and Methane Research Photos August 2009 on Chuckochki Cape, in Russia's Far East. Katey Walter Anthony and colleagues spotted these reindeer escaped from their heard as they climbed up a nearby permafrost exposure to peer into the thermokarst lake basin in the forefront of the photo. Guido Grosse. This flotilla was the base camp for Grosse and Katey Walter Anthony on their 2009 expedition to the East Siberian Sea to study permafrost carbon and methane from ancient thaw lakes. Guido Grosse. Tube Dispenser Lake in Cherskii, Russia, September 2003. Katey Walter Anthony made long-term methane measurements. On this day she and her field assistant worked from a rubber raft gathering samples. At the time of this photo they were drying by a small wood fire after the wet sampling. Katey Walter Anthony. Professor Terry Chapin and Katey Walter Anthony as his graduate student in May 2001. Chapin and Walter Anthony are struggling to separate a tube containing lake sediments from the core head. They are standing on a thermokarst lake near Cherskii, Russia. Melissa Chapin. Katey Walter Anthony is extracting a methane bubble trap from a thermokarst pond near Cherskii, Russia in 2001. Only about a decade earlier, this was a forest area underlain by icy permafrost. The ice is melting, so the ground surface subsides. The sink hole filled with water forming a pond. This pond will continue to help thaw the permafrost around it, eventually expanding into a large thermokarst lake. Nikita Zimov This photo taken in May 2001 by Terry Chapin shows Katey Walter Anthony in the first year of PhD research probing the shallow seasonal depth of thaw in a recently drained thermokarst lake basin near Cherskii, Russia. Terry Chapin. Alpenglow highlights a Russian church in this view from the look out of the Northeast Science Station in Cherskii September 2004. The science station served as a base from which research by founder and director, Sergey Zimov, and others on Siberian Yedoma permafrost has been conducted since the 1980s. Katey Walter Anthony. Katey Walter Anthony on a 2007 expedition for hydrochemistry off the coast of Alaska. Gemma Atwal. Katey Walter Anthony shows methane collected into large plastic bags from a strong geologic seep at Qualluraq Lake on Alaska's North Slope. Moments later we lit a match and observed a great explosion, demonstrating the seep composition as methane. Methane is flammable and also an important greenhouse gas, which is released daily from millions of seeps across Alaska. Gemma Atwal. Katey Walter Anthony descends through the bottom of glacial ice near Juneau, Alaska in July 2007. Katey is studying methane production and emissions in environments where glaciers are melting and ice retreating. Michelle Koppes. Sergey Zimov, Director of the Northeast Science Station in Cherskii, Russia stands near the base of this massive exposed Yedoma permafrost ice wedge in this August 2001 photo taken at Duvanni Yar. The soil trapped behind the ice wedge is high in organic content. When this Yedoma permafrost melts the carbon is made available to microbes which produce carbon dioxide and methane. Katey Walter Anthony. Water and Environmental Research Center (WERC) Engineering Learning & Innovation Facility (ELIF) 1764 Tanana Loop PO Box 75 5910 Fairbanks, AK 99775-5910, USA phone (907) 474-7789 fax (907) 474-7041 nmisarti@alaska.edu The University of Alaska is an AA/EO employer and educational institution and prohibits illegal discrimination against any individual. Learn more about UA's notice of nondiscrimination. For technical issues regarding this website, please contact cem.web@alaska.edu.", "Thermokarst dictionary definition | thermokarst defined Definitions thermokarst\u00a0\u00a0ther\u00b7mo\u00b7karst nounA landscape pattern formed by the melting of permafrost and characterized by patterns of hummocks and water-filled depressions. THE AMERICAN HERITAGE\u00ae DICTIONARY OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE, FIFTH EDITION by the Editors of the American Heritage Dictionaries. Copyright \u00a9 2016, 2011 by Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company. Published by Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company. All rights reserved. Link/Cite Link to this page Cite this page MLA Style \"thermokarst.\" YourDictionary, n.d. Web. 27 February 2019. <https://www.yourdictionary.com/thermokarst>. APA Style thermokarst. (n.d.). Retrieved February 27th, 2019, from https://www.yourdictionary.com/thermokarst Dictionary Thesaurus Examples See in a sentence Example articles Quotes Famous Quotes Quote Articles Spanish Spanish-English Translation Reference Reference Education ESL Grammar Abbreviations Biography Books & Literature Examples Foreign Languages Resources Slideshows Word\u00a0Finder Word\u00a0Finder 4 Pics 1 Word Answers Anagram Solver Unscramble Word Cookies Cheat Word Game Dictionary Word Unscrambler Words With Friends Cheat Share DEFINITIONS Dictionary Thesaurus Examples See in a sentence Example articles Quotes Famous Quotes Quote Articles Spanish Spanish-English Translation Reference Reference Education ESL Grammar Abbreviations Biography Books & Literature Examples Foreign Languages Resources Slideshows Word\u00a0Finder Word\u00a0Finder 4 Pics 1 Word Answers Anagram Solver Unscramble Word Cookies Cheat Word Game Dictionary Word Unscrambler Words With Friends Cheat Share Home Dictionary Definitionsthermokarst Also Mentioned In thermokarsts drunken-trees WORDS NEAR thermokarst IN THE DICTIONARY thermohydrometerthermohydrometersthermojetthermojunctionthermokarstthermokarststhermokinesisthermokineticthermolabilethermolabilities Scrabble\u00ae points: 20 More on Word Finder \u2192 Follow YourDictionary Get our free Amazon Alexa Skills! Join YourDictionary today Yes, I'd like to receive Word of the Day emails from YourDictionary.com By continuing, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Please set a username for yourself. People will see it as Author Name with your public flash cards. Username:", "Thermokarst : definition of Thermokarst and synonyms of Thermokarst (English) English \u25bc \u00bb English \u25bc \u2194 search Arabic Bulgarian Chinese Croatian Czech Danish Dutch English Estonian Finnish French German Greek Hebrew Hindi Hungarian Icelandic Indonesian Italian Japanese Korean Latvian Lithuanian Malagasy Norwegian Persian Polish Portuguese Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovenian Spanish Swedish Thai Turkish Vietnamese Arabic Bulgarian Chinese Croatian Czech Danish Dutch English Estonian Finnish French German Greek Hebrew Hindi Hungarian Icelandic Indonesian Italian Japanese Korean Latvian Lithuanian Malagasy Norwegian Persian Polish Portuguese Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovenian Spanish Swedish Thai Turkish Vietnamese anagrams crosswords wikipedia Ebay definition - Thermokarst definition of Wikipedia Advertizing \u25bc Wikipedia Thermokarst Thermokarst is a land surface characterised by very irregular surfaces of marshy hollows and small hummocks formed as ice-rich permafrost thaws, that occurs in Arctic areas, and on a smaller scale in mountainous areas such as the Himalayas and the Swiss Alps. These pitted surfaces resemble those formed by solution in some karst areas of limestone, which is how they came to have karst attached to their name without the presence of any limestone. Small domes that form on the surface due to frost heaving with the onset of winter are only temporary features. They then collapse with the arrival of next summer's thaw and leave a small surface depression. Some ice lenses grow and form larger surface hummocks, which last many years and sometimes become covered with grasses and sedges, until they begin to thaw. These domed surfaces eventually collapse either annually or after longer periods and form depressions which contribute to uneven surfaces. These are included within the general label of thermokarst. The related term thermokarst lake, also called a thaw lake or cave-in lake, refers to a body of freshwater, usually shallow, that is formed in a depression by meltwater from thawing permafrost.[1] Depressions are often produced by the collapse of ground levels associated with permafrost thaw. Continued thawing of the permafrost substrate can lead to the drainage and eventual disappearance of thermokarst lakes, leaving them, in such cases, a geomorphologically temporary phenomenon.[2] In recent years, thermokarst lakes have become increasingly common in Siberia and other tundra environments.[3] See also Arctic shrinkage Alas References ^ Bucksch, Herbert. Dictionary Geotechnical Engineering. New York, Springer, 1997. ^ Phillips, Marcia, Lukas U. Arenson, and Sarah M. Springman, eds. Permafrost. London, Taylor & Francis, 2003. ^ Smith, L. C., Sheng, Y., MacDonald, G. M. & Hinzman, L. D. (2005). \"Disappearing arctic lakes.\". Science 308: 1429. External links New Scientist article UCAR press release Periglacial environment Landforms Bratschen\u00a0\u00b7 Cryoplanation terrace\u00a0\u00b7 Palsa\u00a0\u00b7 Periglacial lake\u00a0\u00b7 Pingo\u00a0\u00b7 Rockglacier\u00a0\u00b7 Thermokarst Patterned ground Frost boil\u00a0\u00b7 Polygons\u00a0\u00b7 Solifluction lobe\u00a0\u00b7 Sorted stripe\u00a0\u00b7 Stone ring Processes Cryoplanation\u00a0\u00b7 Cryosuction\u00a0\u00b7 Cryoturbation\u00a0\u00b7 Frost heave\u00a0\u00b7 Frost weathering\u00a0\u00b7 Gelifluction\u00a0\u00b7 Methane release\u00a0\u00b7 Nivation\u00a0\u00b7 Solifluction\u00a0\u00b7 Zero-curtain effect Soils Active layer\u00a0\u00b7 Gelisols\u00a0\u00b7 Ice lens\u00a0\u00b7 Ice wedge\u00a0\u00b7 Peat\u00a0\u00b7 Permafrost\u00a0\u00b7 Talik\u00a0\u00b7 Yedoma Biomes Montane grasslands and shrublands\u00a0\u00b7 Taiga (Drunken trees) \u00a0\u00b7 Tundra Climate Alpine\u00a0\u00b7 Polar\u00a0\u00b7 Subarctic Retrieved from \"http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thermokarst&oldid=491884155\" Categories: Periglacial landformsPatterned grounds This entry is from Wikipedia, the leading user-contributed encyclopedia. It may not have been reviewed by professional editors (see full disclaimer)Donate to Wikimedia All translations of Thermokarst sensagent sensagent's content definitionssynonymsantonymsencyclopedia Advertising \u25bc Webmaster Solution Alexandria A windows (pop-into) of information (full-content of Sensagent) triggered by double-clicking any word on your webpage. Give contextual explanation and translation from your sites ! Try here\u00a0\u00a0or \u00a0\u00a0get the code SensagentBox With a SensagentBox, visitors to your site can access reliable information on over 5 million pages provided by Sensagent.com. Choose the design that fits your site. Business solution Improve your site content Add new content to your site from Sensagent by XML. Crawl products or adds Get XML access to reach the best products. Index images and define metadata Get XML access to fix the meaning of your metadata. Please, email us to describe your idea. WordGame The English word games are: \u25cb\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0Anagrams \u25cb\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0Wildcard, crossword \u25cb\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0Lettris \u25cb\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0Boggle. Lettris Lettris is a curious tetris-clone game where all the bricks have the same square shape but different content. Each square carries a letter. To make squares disappear and save space for other squares you have to assemble English words (left, right, up, down) from the falling squares. boggle Boggle gives you 3 minutes to find as many words (3 letters or more) as you can in a grid of 16 letters. You can also try the grid of 16 letters. Letters must be adjacent and longer words score better. See if you can get into the grid Hall of Fame ! English dictionary Main references Most English definitions are provided by WordNet . English thesaurus is mainly derived from The Integral Dictionary (TID). English Encyclopedia is licensed by Wikipedia (GNU). Copyrights The wordgames anagrams, crossword, Lettris and Boggle are provided by Memodata. The web service Alexandria is granted from Memodata for the Ebay search. The SensagentBox are offered by sensAgent. Translation Change the target language to find translations. Tips: browse the semantic fields (see From ideas to words) in two languages to learn more. 5903 online visitors computed in 0.047s Contact Us | Company Information | Privacy policy |\u00a0Last modifications Copyright \u00a9 2012 sensagent Corporation: Online Encyclopedia, Thesaurus, Dictionary definitions and more. All rights reserved. synonym - definition - dictionary - define - translation - translate - translator - conjugation - anagram I would like to report: section : in the definition above in the definition section in the synonyms section in the translation section a spelling or a grammatical mistake an offensive content(racist, pornographic, injurious, etc.) a copyright violation an error a missing statement other please precise: Advertize Partnership Company informations My account login registration Advertising \u25bc Cookies help us deliver our services. By using our services, you agree to our use of cookies. Find out more", "Classroom Activities | National Snow and Ice Data Center Skip to main content National Snow and Ice Data Center Home Data Data Sets for Research Brightness Temperature Glaciers Ice Sheets Permafrost Sea Ice Soil Moisture Snow ...search for more Scientific Data Search Support for Researchers Analysis & Imaging Tools Data Announcements Submit Your Data Data Policies User Support Data for Everyone Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Glacier Photograph Collection Greenland Ice Sheet Today MASIE (Daily sea ice extent) Satellite Observations of Arctic Change Sea Ice Index Virtual Globes: Google Earth Sponsored Programs Antarctic Glaciological Data Center Exchange for Local Observations and Knowledge of the Arctic (ELOKA) NOAA at NSIDC NASA Distributed Active Archive Center at NSIDC (NSIDC DAAC) Looking for facts and information? See About the Cryosphere. Research Scientists Research Grants Scientific Publications Informatics Research NSIDC Scientific Expeditions On Thin Ice: Expedition to a Crumbling Ice Shelf Scientists blog from Antarctica and provide a glimpse of what it's like to do research in the field. Read their blog ... News For the Media Newsroom: For the Media For Data Users Data Announcements The Drift Current Conditions Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Greenland Today Satellite Observations of Arctic Change NSIDC In the News Events NSIDC Monthly Highlights Icelights: Answers to your burning questions about ice and climate What's hot in the news around climate and sea ice and what are scientists talking about now? Read more... About About NSIDC NSIDC People Our Sponsors Jobs NSIDC Monthly Highlights Use & Copyright Contact Us Support NSIDC NSIDC's Green Data Center About the Cryosphere Quick Facts All About The Cryosphere All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Frozen Ground All About Sea Ice All About Arctic Climatology & Meteorology Snow, Ice and Climate Change Studying the Cryosphere Photo Gallery Educational Resources Cryosphere Glossary What is the Cryosphere? When scientists talk about the cryosphere, they mean the places on Earth where water is in its solid form, frozen into ice or snow. Read more ... Web pagesData Sets All About Frozen Ground Introduction Physical Science and Frozen GroundHow Does It Form? What Affects It? Where is It? How Does It Affect Land? Climate and Frozen Ground Ecology and Frozen GroundPlants Animals People and Frozen Ground Studying Frozen Ground Activities and More InformationClassroom Activities Further Reading Interview with a Scientist Methane and Frozen Ground About This Site Share Your Feedback How to Cite Classroom Activities High school students drill into frozen ground outside of their school in Alaska. \u2014Credit: Kenji Yoshikawa The following activities were located with the help of a science teacher. These activities were not created by NSIDC, and the links will take you away from the NSIDC Web site. To find other educational resources and links to advanced information, see the Further Readings Web page. Permafrost and Frozen Ground How Permanent is Permafrost? This activity explores the relationship between surface air temperature and permafrost (soil) temperature. Data from boreholes at five locations in Russia are provided in Excel spreadsheets. The data can also be viewed in Google Earth. Hot Times in Alaska: Permafrost (PDF, 46 KB) This activity from the PBS television series Scientific American Frontiers was designed for grades 5 through 12. It includes an introduction to permafrost, the opportunity to create and examine frozen soil, and a hands-on activity in quantifying the effects of frozen soil on water percolation. Visit the PBS Hot Times in Alaska Web site. Polar Land and Life: Educational Activity on Permafrost Create samples of different frozen soils, complete with ice wedges, and observe changes in the soils from permafrost forming and then thawing. Newton's Apple Permafrost Activity Try this activity to see how structures can melt the permafrost around them.\u00a0 A supplementary activity (Permafrost Try Its) simulates ice wedging in soil. Forest and Tundra Ecology (PDF, 4.7 MB) Find a variety of activities for all primary and secondary grade levels. Although the activities were designed for Alaska students, access to a boreal forest or tundra is not necessary. Climate and Carbon The Greenhouse Effect Find background information on the greenhouse effect and solar radiation on this University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR)-produced page.\u00a0 Then try activities to explore albedo and the greenhouse effect. UCAR Activity on Climate Variability This page includes background information and an activity to simulate variability of global temperatures. Teaching Tips Children's Misconceptions about Weather: A Review of the Literature This article reviews the academic literature concerning children's weather misconceptions. Find Data Search NSIDC Data NASA Earthdata Search IceBridge Portal Data Collections List Stay Current Arctic Sea Ice News and Analysis Sea Ice Index (Passive microwave satellite data) MASIE (Daily sea ice extent, multi-source) Greenland Today Newsroom Learn About Snow and Ice Icelights: Answers to Your Questions Cryosphere Quick Facts All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Sea Ice Arctic Climatology - A Primer Get Help Knowledge Base Etc. Use & Copyright Web Policy Jobs Home | Contact Us\u00a9 2019, National Snow and Ice Data Center :: Advancing knowledge of Earth's frozen regions", "Physical Science and Frozen Ground | National Snow and Ice Data Center Skip to main content National Snow and Ice Data Center Home Data Data Sets for Research Brightness Temperature Glaciers Ice Sheets Permafrost Sea Ice Soil Moisture Snow ...search for more Scientific Data Search Support for Researchers Analysis & Imaging Tools Data Announcements Submit Your Data Data Policies User Support Data for Everyone Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Glacier Photograph Collection Greenland Ice Sheet Today MASIE (Daily sea ice extent) Satellite Observations of Arctic Change Sea Ice Index Virtual Globes: Google Earth Sponsored Programs Antarctic Glaciological Data Center Exchange for Local Observations and Knowledge of the Arctic (ELOKA) NOAA at NSIDC NASA Distributed Active Archive Center at NSIDC (NSIDC DAAC) Looking for facts and information? See About the Cryosphere. Research Scientists Research Grants Scientific Publications Informatics Research NSIDC Scientific Expeditions On Thin Ice: Expedition to a Crumbling Ice Shelf Scientists blog from Antarctica and provide a glimpse of what it's like to do research in the field. Read their blog ... News For the Media Newsroom: For the Media For Data Users Data Announcements The Drift Current Conditions Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Greenland Today Satellite Observations of Arctic Change NSIDC In the News Events NSIDC Monthly Highlights Icelights: Answers to your burning questions about ice and climate What's hot in the news around climate and sea ice and what are scientists talking about now? Read more... About About NSIDC NSIDC People Our Sponsors Jobs NSIDC Monthly Highlights Use & Copyright Contact Us Support NSIDC NSIDC's Green Data Center About the Cryosphere Quick Facts All About The Cryosphere All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Frozen Ground All About Sea Ice All About Arctic Climatology & Meteorology Snow, Ice and Climate Change Studying the Cryosphere Photo Gallery Educational Resources Cryosphere Glossary What is the Cryosphere? When scientists talk about the cryosphere, they mean the places on Earth where water is in its solid form, frozen into ice or snow. Read more ... Web pagesData Sets All About Frozen Ground Introduction Physical Science and Frozen GroundHow Does It Form? What Affects It? Where is It? How Does It Affect Land? Climate and Frozen Ground Ecology and Frozen GroundPlants Animals People and Frozen Ground Studying Frozen Ground Activities and More InformationClassroom Activities Further Reading Interview with a Scientist Methane and Frozen Ground About This Site Share Your Feedback How to Cite Physical Science and Frozen Ground Ice melting in the frozen peat created these shallow ponds and lakes in the Hudson Bay Lowlands in Manitoba, Canada. The lakes are up to several hundred meters across. (High-resolution image not available) \u2014Credit: Geological Survey of Canada The idea of frozen ground might seem simple. But how it forms, why it is important, and where scientists find it are difficult questions. Plus, frozen ground is sometimes hidden under plants, snow, and even oceans. In this section, Physical Science, find out how frozen ground forms, and how it affects the landscape. Learn how deep the ground can freeze. Find out how to tell the difference between seasonally frozen ground and permafrost. Find Data Search NSIDC Data NASA Earthdata Search IceBridge Portal Data Collections List Stay Current Arctic Sea Ice News and Analysis Sea Ice Index (Passive microwave satellite data) MASIE (Daily sea ice extent, multi-source) Greenland Today Newsroom Learn About Snow and Ice Icelights: Answers to Your Questions Cryosphere Quick Facts All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Sea Ice Arctic Climatology - A Primer Get Help Knowledge Base Etc. Use & Copyright Web Policy Jobs Home | Contact Us\u00a9 2019, National Snow and Ice Data Center :: Advancing knowledge of Earth's frozen regions", "The Frozen Ground | Film | The Guardian Turn autoplay off Turn autoplay on Please activate cookies in order to turn autoplay off Jump to content [s] Jump to site navigation [0] Jump to search [4] Terms and conditions [8] Edition: UK US AU Your activity Email subscriptions Account details Linked services Sign out Profile Beta About us About us, Contact us Press office Guardian Print Centre Guardian readers' editor Observer readers' editor Terms of service Privacy policy Advertising guide Digital archive Digital edition Guardian Weekly Buy Guardian and Observer photos Today's paper Main section G2 features Comment and debate Editorials, letters and corrections Obituaries Other lives Sport EducationGuardian Subscribe Subscribe News Sport Comment Culture Business Money Life & style Travel Environment Tech TV Video Dating Offers Jobs Culture Film The Frozen Ground Details: 2013, USA, Cert 15, 105 mins Direction: Scott Walker Genre: Crime Summary: True life crime story about woman who helped catch serial killer Robert Hansen. With: John Cusack,\u00a0Nicolas Cage,\u00a0Radha Mitchell and Vanessa Hudgens Our reviews Philip French Nicolas Cage and John Cusack star in an efficient thriller based on a real-life hunt for a serial killer, writes Philip French Peter Bradshaw Nicolas Cage, Vanessa Hudgens and John Cusack give solid performances in this Prime Suspect-like thriller, writes Peter Bradshaw User reviews Read user reviews Related articles Nicolas Cage: 'People think I'm not in on the joke' The castles. The cars. The out-there acting. The 108-day marriage to Lisa Marie Presley. Nicolas Cage has a\u00a0reputation for\u00a0excess \u00e2\u0080\u0093 but\u00a0we've got him all wrong, he\u00a0tells Emma Brockes The Frozen Ground - video review Video (4min 00sec), Xan Brooks, Peter Bradshaw and Henry Barnes review a thriller about the real-life hunt for Robert Hansen, an Alaskan serial killer who murdered at least 17 women in the early 1980s The Frozen Ground: watch the trailer - video Video (1min 51sec), Watch the trailer for The Frozen Ground, a thriller about the real-life hunt for Alaskan serial killer Robert Hansen Today's best video The week in TV Telly addict Andrew Collins casts his critical eye over New Worlds (above), Klondike, The Trip to Italy, Endeavour and Monkey Planet 'Get your arse out, mate' Leah Green turns the tables on everyday sexism Spanish football player's stunning solo goal A player from Arosa scores a Maradona-like goal Whitewater kayaking: 'I wanted to spend every day on the river' Freestyle athlete takes us through his career On Film Most viewed Latest Last 24 hours 1. Quiz: Can you match each of these Bond villains with their own evil plot? 2. Star Wars Episode VII: what we know as shooting starts 3. The Goonies sequel confirmed by director Richard Donner 4. After Gremlins and The Goonies, what other 80s films need a remake? 5. My guilty pleasure: Trading Places More most viewed Last 24 hours 1. Cate Blanchett sets her sights on Sutton Hoo drama The Dig 2. Quiz: Can you match each of these Bond villains with their own evil plot? 3. Russian cinemas fined for showing The Wolf of Wall Street 4. 2 States and screen kisses: 'Bollywood is cranking it up a notch' 5. After Gremlins and The Goonies, what other 80s films need a remake? All today's stories Follow NSA-related developments as controversy over leaks continues to make headlines Film search Latest reviews Noah review \u00e2\u0080\u0093 'a preposterous but endearingly unhinged epic' Russell Crowe wrestles angels and demons in Darren Aronofsky's $125m mashup of the ancient story of Noah, writes Mark Kermode Honour review \u00e2\u0080\u0093 Shan Khan's 'conflicted' first feature The Double review \u00e2\u0080\u0093 Richard Ayoade's dark doppelganger drama Divergent review \u00e2\u0080\u0093 lacks lustre and grit A Story of Children and Film review \u00e2\u0080\u0093 Mark Cousins's 'spine-tingling' visual essay More film reviews Sponsored feature Across the site Film reviews Film news Film trailers Film show Video interviews License/buy our content | Privacy policy | Terms & conditions | Advertising guide | Accessibility | A-Z index | Inside the Guardian blog | About us | Work for us | Join our dating site today \u00a9 2014 Guardian News and Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved.", "The Frozen Ground - Movie Reviews - Rotten Tomatoes Home Top Box Office Tickets & Showtimes DVD & Streaming TV News Join Newsletter \u00d7Close What is the Tomatometer\u00ae? The Tomatometer rating \u2013 based on the published opinions of hundreds of film and television critics \u2013 is a trusted measurement of movie and TV programming quality for millions of moviegoers. It represents the percentage of professional critic reviews that are positive for a given film or television show. From the Critics From RT Users Like You! Fresh The Tomatometer is 60% or higher. Rotten The Tomatometer is 59% or lower. Certified Fresh Movies and TV shows are Certified Fresh with a steady Tomatometer of 75% or higher after a set amount of reviews (80 for wide-release movies, 40 for limited-release movies, 20 for TV shows), including 5 reviews from Top Critics. Audience Score Percentage of users who rate a movie or TV show positively. Learn More What's the Tomatometer\u00ae? RT Critics Home Box Office TV DVD MORE News SIGN UP LOG IN Movies & DVDs Movies in Theaters Opening This Week Top Box Office Coming Soon to Theaters Weekend Earnings Certified Fresh Movies On Dvd & Streaming Netflix Streaming iTunes Amazon and Amazon Prime Fandango Now Top Rentals New Releases Coming Soon to DVD Certified Fresh Movies Browse All More Top Movies Trailers Forums Certified Fresh Picks TV View All View All More Top TV Shows Certified Fresh TV Certified Fresh Pick News Columns 24 Frames Binge Guide Box Office Guru Critics Consensus Five Favorite Films Now Streaming Parental Guidance Red Carpet Roundup RT on DVD The Simpsons Decade Sub-Cult Tech Talk Total Recall TV Countdown TV Talk Video Interviews Weekly Ketchup View All Best and Worst View All Guides View All RT News Tickets & Showtimes Trending on RT Sign Up For Our Newsletter Captain Marvel Reviews Cancelled/Renewed TV March TV Binge Guide The Frozen Ground R,1 hr. 45 min. Mystery & Suspense, Drama Directed By:\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 Scott Walker In Theaters:\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 Aug 23, 2013Wide On DVD:\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 Oct 1, 2013The Film Arcade The Frozen Ground 2 minutes30 seconds Added: Jun 14, 2013 View All Videos (1) The Frozen Ground Reviews All Critics Top Critics My Critics DVD Audience All Critics All Critics Top Critics My Critics DVD Audience Page 1 of 3 Chris Fennell CineVue February 25, 2019 A by-the-numbers addition to a well-worn genre that is destined to occupy the supermarket bargain bins sooner than perhaps expected. Full Review | Original Score: 2/5 Camilla Long Sunday Times (UK) March 8, 2018 There's not much between this and a Sunday-night drama, but the ice-bound setting is different and beautiful. Full Review | Original Score: 3/5 Dennis Schwartz Ozus' World Movie Reviews November 8, 2017 Watchable. Full Review | Original Score: B- Larushka Ivan-Zadeh Metro (UK) September 5, 2017 This is the kind of by-the-book, no-surprises, 'based on actual events' serial killer thriller you could write yourself. Full Review Bill Newcott AARP Movies for Grownups April 18, 2016 Cage hones his weary cop's character to a dull point, rough and ragged, like the lead of a detective's pencil scratching notes on a crumpled pad. Full Review | Original Score: 3 of 5 Jeffrey M. Anderson Common Sense Media September 18, 2014 As written and directed by Scott Walker, THE FROZEN GROUND isn't great, but it's surprisingly effective, thanks to its no-frills approach and its care with the actors and characters. Full Review | Original Score: 3/5 Jack Giroux Film School Rejects August 10, 2014 It's all around safe and plain, simple and to the point, and all very, very by-the-numbers. Full Review | Original Score: C Jason Best Movie Talk February 1, 2014 The Frozen Ground covers familiar territory but benefits from authentically seamy scene setting amid the bars and strip-joints where the killer found his prey, and from solid performances by its leads, all of whom are acting against type. Full Review Richard Haridy Quickflix December 10, 2013 The Frozen Ground is trying its best to act as a genuine tribute to the victims of a horrible crime. Unfortunately it falls short... Though still functioning as a solid genre piece, the chasm between intention and execution is embarrassingly apparent. Full Review | Original Score: 3/5 Forrest Hartman Reno Gazette-Journal October 1, 2013 The Frozen Ground isn't innovative, but it is a well-paced and engaging thriller that has the added appeal of a truth-based narrative. Full Review | Original Score: 3/4 MaryAnn Johanson Flick Filosopher September 30, 2013 In a rote cat-and-mouse cop-and-serial-killer story, Vanessa Hudgens' 'victim' is far more compelling than either cop Nicolas Cage or killer John Cusack. Full Review Paul Chambers Movie Chambers September 30, 2013 The scenes where Cage grills Cusack are the best thing about this very average thriller. Full Review | Original Score: C- Susan Granger SSG Syndicate September 2, 2013 Choppy and chilling, it's destined for a quick burial in the icy tundra. Full Review | Original Score: 5/10 Betty Jo Tucker ReelTalk Movie Reviews August 29, 2013 A chilling thriller with first-rate performances by John Cusack, Nicolas Cage and Vanessa Hudgens. Full Review Brian Orndorf Blu-ray.com August 28, 2013 Are we mourning the loss of these women or delighting in their downfall, relishing their abuse? Cheap thrills destroy whatever pure intentions launched Ground, chaining the effort to the most banal of B-movie pursuits. Full Review | Original Score: D+ Top Critic Sheila O'Malley RogerEbert.com August 27, 2013 \"The Frozen Ground\" trucks in cliche, as most serial killer and police procedural films do, but the strength of the acting (from the leads down to people with only one or two lines) helps ground the film. Full Review | Original Score: 3/4 Doris Toumarkine Film Journal International August 26, 2013 Impressive debut from New Zealand-born Scott Walker is told with style and panache. Strong performances, fevered pacing and immersive location lensing are big pluses pushing this from \"B\" pic to A-. Full Review Pete Hammond Movieline August 26, 2013 We've seen a lot of serial killer movies but this intriguing true story is well-acted and involving enough to be worth a shot. Full Review | Original Score: 3/5 Brent Simon Shared Darkness August 23, 2013 A true crime period piece that somewhat interestingly eschews a lot of investigatory grind in favor of moral certitude and throwback, cat-and-mouse tension. Full Review | Original Score: C+ Annlee Ellingson Paste Magazine August 23, 2013 Unfortunately, with a confusing script pocked with plot holes, The Frozen Ground misses an opportunity to create a lasting testament to their memories. Full Review | Original Score: 5.8/10 Page 1 of 3 Help About Rotten Tomatoes What's the Tomatometer? Critic Submission Licensing Advertise Careers Follow Us Copyright \u00a9 2018 Fandango. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms and Policies | Ad Choices Copyright \u00a9 2018 Fandango. All rights reserved. Terms and Policies\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 Privacy Policy", "Movieguide reviews the thriller FROZEN GROUND Reviews Movie Reviews In Theaters TV Reviews Articles Award Nominees Videos Red Carpet Interviews Now News Top 10 Year Genre Holiday Theme Recommended Donate Search Reviews Movie Reviews In Theaters TV Reviews Articles Award Nominees Videos Red Carpet Interviews Now News Top 10 Year Genre Holiday Theme Recommended Donate HomeReviewsTHE FROZEN GROUND \"Redeeming Lost Women\"Quality: Content: -2 \"EXTREME CAUTION\"NoneLightModerateHeavyLanguage Violence Sex Nudity Summary:THE FROZEN GROUND stars Nicolas Cage in the story of a conscientious police sergeant who must gain the trust of a young lady caught up in the sex trade to catch a serial killer. An absorbing, redemptive crime thriller, THE FROZEN GROUND conveys the importance of looking out for the weakest members of society with Christ-like conviction, but features extremely explicit content, making it inappropriate for families.Review:THE FROZEN GROUND gives a chilling look at the hunt for the notorious real-life serial predator, Robert Hansen (John Cusack), who preyed upon women in the 1970s and 80s in Alaska. Set in 1983, the story follows loving father and husband Sgt. Jack Holcombe (played by Nicolas Cage). Jack pours over case files, leads his fellow officers and combs the streets to track down Cindy Paulson (Vanessa Hudgens). As the sole surviving victim who\u2019s escaped the serial predator\u2019s clutches, Cindy\u2019s testimony is crucial to put away a killer who\u2019s slipped past police hands too many times. Though not a Christian movie per se, THE FROZEN GROUND begins by displaying Matthew 10:16 on-screen: \u201cBehold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves,\u201d while ominous music floats overhead. Then, it plunges viewers into a post-crime sequence in the city of Anchorage, Alaska. As the movie progresses, Sgt. Holcombe and his partners comb the gritty streets where prostitutes work, doggedly searching for Cindy. The officers also question people in strip clubs, all in the name of finding her and tracking the serial killer\u2019s victims. THE FROZEN GROUND is a well constructed, absorbing crime thriller. However, the police visits to strip clubs to find the serial killer\u2019s one surviving victim and to track the killer\u2019s movements contains blatant scenes of female nudity in lewd, sexually-objectifying bars. That said, the script treats the subject of murder and the vulnerability of the women\u2019s welfare seriously, however. For instance, the dancers\u2019 nakedness reveals their sad, dehumanized state. The movie doesn\u2019t paint their workplaces as attractive, but as places that debase women and the men who frequent such places. The level and amount of nudity necessitates the most extreme caution, even though it realistically shows how women are debased in such horrid environments. Such degrading places reflects the ugly tone that surrounds real women in these environments night after night across the U.S. and the rest of the world, in cities and rural areas alike. Much of THE FROZEN GROUND surrounds the heartfelt search by Holcomb and his fellow officers. However, a couple brief scenes contain CSI-type gore, visually depicting a decrepit body. Also, MOVIEGUIDE\u00ae issues a strong caution regarding a few detailed conversations about sexual situations and about rape. These acts aren\u2019t shown, but the alarmingly graphic specifics keep THE FROZEN GROUND from being family friendly. After sifting out the chaff, THE FROZEN GROUND tells a strong story of a policeman who works to find Cindy and shelter her with the sincere care and attention of a father. In one argument with a close relative who scoffs at the lengths he goes to in order to save the girl, Cage\u2019s character responds with a line that reflects powerful, Christ-like love. Also, Cindy\u2019s statements and questions about her own family background pointedly speak to the importance of making sure all children have a responsible, protective mother and father. Cage\u2019s portrayal of Sgt. Holcombe believably shows a determined officer and tender family man. His deep respect for human life fuels him to dig through the frozen ground of old cases new and old in order to stop Hansen in his tracks. A poignant, nearly silent, scene where Cindy encounters a wild animal stands in stark contrast to the ugliness of the world she lives in and the situations with Hansen she and others have undergone. Writer/director Scott Walker makes a wonderful, creative decision to incorporate this method of showing such a comparison between the complex sin man creates and the simple, natural beauty of God\u2019s creation. Perhaps similar to SAVING PRIVATE RYAN, THE FROZEN GROUND contains a very good story, but also very explicit content\u00a0\u2013 though the content here is sparsely dotted through the movie. MOVIEGUIDE\u00ae recommends viewing other selections and websites for less salacious and more informative information on prostitution and sex trafficking issues. See our reviews of the narrative movie TRADE OF INNOCENTS and the documentary NEFARIOUS. Like pornography, sex trafficking is a scourge in society that preys on the weak and the young. Content:(BB, C, LLL, VV, SS, NN, A, DD, M) Strong moral worldview with light Christian, redemptive elements about catching a real-life serial killer includes police detective hero is a loving father and husband, good eventually defeats evil, movie quotes Matthew 10:16 onscreen, and dignity/worth is given to lost women involved in prostitution; at least 35 obscenities and profanities (including some \u201cf\u201d words and strong profanities); strong violence includes men beaten and shot, discussion of sexual and brutal violence crimes against women, images of a decomposed murder victim, brief images of kidnapping and violence against one woman victim; strong sexual content includes scenes set in strip clubs, and prostitution details and sexual violence toward women and murder victims are discussed and alluded to in the dialogue; upper and rear female nudity in strip clubs; some alcohol use; smoking and a person facilitates use of an illicit drug and two people use the drug; and, kidnapping.In Brief:THE FROZEN GROUND stars Nicholas Cage as determined police sergeant Jack Holcombe trying to track down a serial killer. Jack must gain the trust of a young woman caught in the sex trade to catch the killer. As the movie progresses, he and his partners comb the gritty streets where prostitutes work, doggedly searching for Cindy. The officers also question people in strip clubs, all in the name of finding her and tracking the serial killer\u2019s movements. THE FROZEN GROUND is based on a true story. It contains brief, but very explicit, scenes. However, it tells a story for adult viewers that\u2019s contemporary, yet timeless and redemptive. The story features a heroic policeman on a dogged, gritty search for a madman. This hero carries a heart of gold to protect and redeem a portion of society that many have thrown away. His deep respect for human life fuels his determination to dig through the frozen ground of old cases new and old to stop a vicious serial killer. It\u2019s the explicit details, however, that keep THE FROZEN GROUND from being family friendly.Want more content like this? Make a donation to Movieguide\u00ae $10 $25 $50 $100 Donate Why Science Fiction Needs GodLord Have Mercy on Miley Cyrus and HollywoodRelated Posts BATMAN & ROBIN THE BORROWERS THE MUSTANG CATS DON\u2019T DANCE UNPLANNED Video Review MRS. BROWN Movieguide DonateMovieguide\u00ae is a 501c3 non-profit. We are only able to make a difference because of your generous support. DONATE TODAY! Release Date: Starring: Nicholas Cage, John Cusack, Vanessa Hudgens, Dean Norris, Kevin Dunn, Jodi Lyn O\u2019Keefe, Katherine LaNasa, Ryan O\u2019Nan, Radha Mitchell, , Curtis \u201c50 Cent\u201d Jackson Genre: Thriller Audience: Adults Rating: R Runtime: 105 minutes Distributor: Lionsgate Films Director: Scott Walker Executive Producer: George Furla, Stepan Martirosyan, Kevin Frakes, Martin Richard Blencowe, Mark Stewart, Brandt Andersen, Brett Granstaff, Corey Large, Ted Fox, Elisa Salinas, Daniel Wagner, Fredrik Malmberg, Olga Valentina, Barry Brooker, Stan Wertlieb Producer: Mark Ordesky, Jane Fleming, Randall Emmett, Curtis Jackson, Remington Chase, Jeff Rice Writer: Scott Walker Address Comments To: Jon Feltheimer, CEO, Lionsgate Films AKA Lions Gate Films (Summit Entertainment/Roadside Attractions) 2700 Colorado Ave. Santa Monica, CA 90404 Phone: (310) 449-9200; Fax: (310) 255-3870; Website: www.lionsgatefilms.com Latest Reviews MR. MAGOO BATMAN & ROBIN THE BORROWERS WIDE AWAKE MRS. BROWN Popular Videos THE SHACK Video Review 3 Reasons for I\u2019M NOT ASHAMED Over 13 REASONS WHY THE LIGHT BETWEEN OCEANS Video Review THE CASE FOR CHRIST Video Review HACKSAW RIDGE Video Review Newsletter About Us About Dr. Baehr About MOVIEGUIDE\u00ae Advertise With Us What The Ratings Mean Speaking Engagements Contact Us Press Awards MOVIEGUIDE\u00ae Awards Kairos Prize Chronos Prize Epiphany Prizes Grace Award Extras Careers Internships Pray For Hollywood Classes Radio Newsletter Extension Books Policies Terms of Use Privacy Policy Sitemap Follow Movieguide\u00ae Copyright \u00a9 2018 by Movieguide\u00ae", "The Frozen Ground Review - IGN Browse Xbox One Xbox 360 PS4 PS3 Vita Nintendo PC Mobile Movies TV Tech Comics Reviews Upcoming Videos Wikis + Cheats Podcasts Boards Trailers IGN on YouTube IGN on Facebook IGN on Twitter MORE Browse Shows Every Wednesday at 3pm PT Beyond! Days Gone Hands-On Impressions play latest Game Scoop! Unlocked Beyond! Nintendo Voice Chat IGN Unfiltered Daily Fix Prepare To Try HotKeys more shows Up At Noon Fireteam Chat IGN Every Ever Linked Together IGN Spotlight IGN Access IGN Plays Every Friday at 3PM! Game Scoop! Anthem & Games-as-a-Disservice play latest Every Friday Nintendo Voice Chat Is Nintendo's 3DS Knocking on Death's Door - NVC 447 play latest Every Tuesday at 3pm PT / 6pm ET Unlocked The Disc-Less Xbox One: Price Predictions and More play latest Reviews PS4 Xbox PC Nintendo Movies TV Tech Esports \u00d7 You've Come This Far... \u00d7 IGN us Big Story Yoshi's Crafted World 'Weighing Acorns' Stage Revealed Reviews Netflix's Triple Frontier Review The Frozen Ground Review Trending Today Netflix's Triple Frontier Review Captain Marvel Review Advertisement Green Book Review Fighting With My Family Review How to Train Your Dragon: The Hidden World Review Happy Death Day 2U Review Alita: Battle Angel Review The Lego Movie 2: The Second Part Review Extremely Wicked, Shockingly Evil and Vile Review I Want to Eat Your Pancreas Review Cold Pursuit Review The Man Who Killed Hitler and Then The Bigfoot Review Netflix's Velvet Buzzsaw Review Miss Bala Review Reign of the Supermen Review Netflix's Polar Review Netflix's FYRE: The Greatest Party That Never Happened Review Netflix's IO Review Glass Review Review by Max Nicholson More From The Frozen Ground Movie Review / 23 Aug 2013 4:23 PM PDT The Frozen Ground Review Share. A forgettable crime thriller with solid performances. By Max Nicholson Writer-director Scott Walker's The Frozen Ground is the true story of Alaskan State Trooper Jack Holcolme (Nicolas Cage), who resolves to stop the murderous rampage of serial killer Robert Hansen (John Cusack). When the bodies of street prostitutes begin piling up in Anchorage, Holcolme makes it his personal mission to find evidence against Hansen before the next body surfaces. During his investigation, Holcolme meets Cindy Paulsen (Vanessa Hudgens), one of Hansen's many kidnapped victims -- but the only one who has lived to tell about it. Armed with knowledge of the previous murders, Cindy's key information gives Holcolme the edge he needs to trail Hansen's crimes. The only question is if he can put the pieces together in time. Exit Theatre Mode Acting-wise, the real standout in The Frozen Ground is Cage, who delivers a refreshing performance as Holcolme. Unlike some of his other recent characters, Cage's turn as an Alaskan State Trooper is focused and relatable. Holcolme is not the same generic action star that Cage has often played, but rather an honest authority figure that's plainly good at his job. As viewers, we see Holcolme struggle with the case, both practically and emotionally, and Cage conveys that frustration with sincerity. Meanwhile, Holcolme's home life remains somewhat underdeveloped, particularly with his wife, who only appears on screen for a sum total of about five minutes; but even those scenes strike a chord to some extent, as they only add to Holcolme's internal conflict. That said, we never see his role as a father and husband play directly into the story, and as a result the character doesn't feel quite whole. Surprisingly, Hudgens also does fine work as the damaged prostitute-turned-stripper Cindy, who ends up playing a much more significant role than initially suspected. Alone, Hudgens doesn't evoke anything special, but her scenes with Cage are very strong, and their relationship becomes the driving force behind the characters, adding depth to both of their story arcs. Really, this is where Cage's Holcolme flourishes as a caring person. Likewise, Cusack does an excellent job portraying the deranged Robert Hansen. Unlike in most crime thrillers, the actor has almost equal screen time to Cage, though Cusack's scenes are much more understated. Hansen rarely speaks as he meticulously plans every step of his murders, covering his tracks along the way. We get a glimpse into his thought process firsthand, and we get a distinct sense of the killer inside him as the film progresses. Even when he's not in the company of his victims, Cusack's character chills. But perhaps even more disturbing than the scenes where he's alone are the ones where he's interacting with his friends and family. The exchanges he shares with his wife and kids are especially unsettling, and Cusack effortlessly transitions between the two drastically different sides of Hansen's coin. Naturally, it takes some time before Cusack and Cage are put in a room together -- and admittedly, their shared screen time is short-lived -- but when they do finally come face to face, it's the highlight of the film. In general, the performances here are solid. It's Scott Walker's script that is Frozen Ground's fatal flaw. While the characters are fairly engaging, the film's straightforward presentation and by-the-numbers procedural style are boring and forgettable. In terms of story, this crime thriller barely stacks up to an average episode of NCIS. Though it's based on a true story, it seems that The Frozen Ground fails to take any creative liberties or play to its strengths. As much as the actors attempt to infuse life into the story, ultimately, you'll probably forget about the plot and how each character got from one place to the next. Beyond its star power, The Frozen Ground is a cold and dreary drama that has little going for it. The narrative isn't muddled or confusing per se (in fact, it may be too simple), but it is certainly bland and a bit predictable. Nevertheless, Cage and Cusack are definite draws, and their commanding screen presences may justify a ticket purchase for some. The Verdict Scott Walker's The Frozen Ground features strong performances from stars Nicolas Cage, John Cusack, and even Vanessa Hudgens. Unfortunately, their collective screen presence doesn't elevate the film's boring, by-the-numbers script, which is easy to follow, but ultimately forgettable. Max Nicholson is a writer for IGN, and he desperately seeks your approval. Show him some love by following @Max_Nicholson on Twitter, or MaxNicholson on IGN. IN THIS ARTICLE The Frozen Ground Releases Aug. 23rd, 2013 theater Okay The Frozen Ground boasts strong performances from Nic Cage and John Cusack, but its script is bland and forgettable. 23 Aug 2013 Great performances from Cage and Cusack. Interesting characters. Bland, procedural storyline. 6.8 i Read our review standards Buying Guide Powered by IGN Deals IGN Recommends I Was Hacked in 2014 and I'm Still Feeling the Effects Devil May Cry 5 Review Don't Miss This Important Captain Marvel Cameo Netflix's After Life Season 1 Review Shazam! First Reactions Twitter Roundup Captain Marvel Post-Credits Scenes Explained Daily Deals: 26% off Devil May Cry 5 for PC Let's Go's Partner Pokemon Feature Could Be in Sword and Shield \u00a9 1996-2019 Ziff Davis, LLC Join the IGN Newsletter Contact Us Careers Advertise Accessibility Support Terms of Use AdChoices We encourage you to read our updated PRIVACY POLICY and COOKIE POLICY. \u00d7", "Melting Arctic Permafrost Releases Acid that Dissolves Rocks News Tech Health Planet Earth Strange News Animals History Culture Space Live Science News Tech Health Planet Earth Strange News Animals History Culture Space Live Science News Tech Health Planet Earth Strange News Animals History Culture Space Live SciencePlanet Earth Melting Arctic Permafrost Releases Acid that Dissolves Rocks By Mindy Weisberger, Senior Writer | September 18, 2018 02:27pm ET MORE Runoff from melting permafrost in Alaska flows toward the sea. Credit: NOAA As temperatures rise in the Arctic, permafrost \u2014 permanently frozen ground \u2014 is defrosting at an alarming rate. But the permafrost isn't the only thing in the Arctic that's melting. Exposed rock that was once covered in ice is dissolving, eaten away by acid. And the effects of this acid bath could have far-reaching impacts on global climate, according to a new study. Icy permafrost is rich in minerals, which are released when the ice melts. The minerals then become vulnerable to chemical weathering, or the breakdown of rock through chemical reactions, scientists recently reported. They investigated areas once covered by permafrost in the western Canadian Arctic, finding evidence of weathering caused by sulfuric acid, produced by sulfide minerals that were released when the permafrost melted. [See Stunning Photos of Earth's Vanishing Ice] Another type of naturally occurring chemical erosion is caused by carbonic acid, and it also dissolves Arctic rock. But although carbonic-acid weathering locks carbon dioxide (CO2) in place, sulfuric-acid erosion releases CO2 into the atmosphere, and it does so in quantities that were not previously accounted for, researchers wrote in the study. Dramatic changes are underway in the Arctic, which is warming twice as fast as any other location on Earth. Sea ice is rapidly dwindling, which reduces the ocean's heat-reflecting cover, accelerating the rise of ocean temperatures. And polar bears, which depend on sea-ice cover to hunt for seals, are losing their hunting grounds, and have a harder time finding enough to eat. On land, melting permafrost is shaping new landscapes, through a process called thermokarst \u2014 a term for thawing-driven erosion that originated in Russia, according to the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). Thermokarst creates land formations such as lakes, pits and sinkholes, and it was previously unknown how this process could affect weathering of exposed minerals, and how that might then impact CO2 release, according to the study. \"These processes may influence the permafrost carbon-climate feedback, but have received little attention,\" the scientists reported. Over geologic timescales, weathering caused by carbonic acid can help to regulate climate, by trapping CO2 and restricting its transfer into the atmosphere. But the researchers found that thermokarst in regions that were rich in sulfides drove production of sulfuric acid, rather than carbonic acid, and thereby released quantities of CO2. An estimated 1,400 billion tons of carbon are stored in permafrost, Live Science previously reported, and as thawing continues and thermokarst activity intensifies, sulfide-rich regions will continue to transfer CO2 from its icy tomb. However, how that will balance out against the permafrost regions that still produce carbon-trapping carbonic acid is unknown, according to the study. The findings were published online Sept. 5 in the journal Geophysical Research Letters. Original article on Live Science. You'd Also Like The Melting Arctic Is Covering Itself in a Warm Layer of Clouds LiveScience The Greenland Ice Sheet Is Melting at Astonishing Rate LiveScience Earth's Tilt May Exacerbate a Melting Antarctic LiveScience The Arctic Is Not Doing Well (at All) LiveScience Author Bio Mindy Weisberger, Senior Writer Mindy Weisberger is a senior writer for Live Science covering general science topics, especially those relating to brains, bodies, and behaviors in humans and other animals \u2014 living and extinct. Mindy studied filmmaking at Columbia University; her videos about dinosaurs, biodiversity, human origins, evolution, and astrophysics appear in the American Museum of Natural History, on YouTube, and in museums and science centers worldwide. Follow Mindy on Twitter. Mindy Weisberger, Senior Writer on Science Newsletter: Subscribe Submit Follow Us Most Popular SpaceX Crew Dragon Splashes Down in Atlantic to Cap Historic Test Flight Secret Group of Killer Whales Discovered in Southern Ocean 15 Unforgettable Images of Stars Why Daylight Saving Time Starts Sunday Can You Learn Anything While You Sleep? HomeAbout Us Company Company Info About Us Contact Us Advertise with Us Using Our Content Licensing & Reprints Terms of Use Copyright Policy Privacy Policy Network Top Ten Reviews Tom's Guide Laptop Mag Tom's Hardware Space.com Live Science AnandTech Dignifyed FOLLOW US Subscribe SUBMIT Copyright \u00a9 All Rights Reserved.", "The Frozen Ground Movie Review (2013) | Roger Ebert In Memoriam 1942 \u2013 2013 \u201cRoger Ebert loved movies.\u201d RogerEbert.com Reviews Great Movies Chaz's Journal Blogs Far Flungers Channels Contributors 3 Faces A savvy rebel, Panahi continues to laugh in the face of that sentence and produce one fascinating cinematic oeuvre after another, manipulating and evolving the\u2026 Captain Marvel The girl power (and grrl power) ring out loud and clear, if a bit hollow. Other Reviews Gloria Bell An Elephant Sitting Still Black Mother Review Archives \u2716 Howards End Roger Ebert on James Ivory's \"Howards End\". Ballad of Narayama \"The Ballad of Narayama\" is a Japanese film of great beauty and elegant artifice, telling a story of startling cruelty. What a space it opens\u2026 Other Reviews Monsieur Hire Veronika Voss Spirit of the Beehive Great Movie Archives \u2716 Happy International Women\u2019s Day: Wild Geese Chaz's Journal | by Chaz Ebert A reprint of Mary Oliver's poem, \"Wild Geese\" in honor of International Women's Day. PBS' Four-Part Film Series, Women, War & Peace II Chaz's Journal | by Jana Monji The PBS documentary series returns with four stories about women involve in conflicts in Northern Ireland, Egypt, Gaza, Bangladesh and Haiti. Other Articles Netflix's Ricky Gervais Series After Life Doesn't Have Enough Reasons to Exist | Chaz's Journal Art, Love, and the Healing Ambiguities of Shirkers | Chaz's Journal Black Women vs. The End of the World (Again) | Chaz's Journal Chaz's Journal Archives \u2716 Happy International Women\u2019s Day: Wild Geese Chaz's Journal | by Chaz Ebert A reprint of Mary Oliver's poem, \"Wild Geese\" in honor of International Women's Day. PBS' Four-Part Film Series, Women, War & Peace II Chaz's Journal | by Jana Monji The PBS documentary series returns with four stories about women involve in conflicts in Northern Ireland, Egypt, Gaza, Bangladesh and Haiti. Other Articles Netflix's Ricky Gervais Series After Life Doesn't Have Enough Reasons to Exist | Chaz's Journal Art, Love, and the Healing Ambiguities of Shirkers | Chaz's Journal Black Women vs. The End of the World (Again) | Chaz's Journal Blog Archives \u2716 How The Poseidon Adventure Got Me Hooked On Movies for Life Far Flungers | by Gerardo Valero Far-Flung Correspondent Gerardo Valero reflects on one of his favorite movies, The Poseidon Adventure. The Lion in Winter Far Flungers | by Seongyong Cho A piece from a Far-Flung Correspondent on The Lion in Winter. Other Articles A Writer Watches Roma in Mexico City | Far Flungers AFI Fest 2018: I Am the Night | Far Flungers Return to Terror: Why the Election of Jair Bolsonaro Would be a Disaster for Brazil | Far Flungers Far Flunger Archives \u2716 Kathryn Bostic on Being the First African-American Female Composer to Join the Academy Interviews | by Chaz Ebert An interview with Kathryn Bostic, acclaimed composer of \"Dear White People\" and \"Toni Morrison: The Pieces I Am.\" Gaspar Noe on Climax, Accidental Allegories, Catastrophe Movies and More Interviews | by Andy Crump An interview with director Gaspar Noe about his provocative new film, Climax. Other Articles Kate Beckinsale Saves Amazon\u2019s Grief-Stricken Thriller Series The Widow | Demanders I Don\u2019t Want to See An Actor Onscreen: Franz Rogowski on Transit, Happy End, Victoria and More | Interviews Christian Petzold on Transit, Kafka, His Love for Den of Thieves and More | Interviews Channel Archives \u2716 Reviews The Frozen Ground The Frozen Ground (2013) Cast Nicolas Cage as Jack Halcombe Vanessa Anne Hudgens as Cindy Paulson John Cusack as Robert Hansen Dean Norris as Sgt. Lyle Haugsven Radha Mitchell as Allie Halcombe 50 Cent as Pimp Clate Johnson Director Scott Walker Writer Scott Walker Crime, Drama, Thriller Rated R 105 minutes | Sheila O'Malley August 25, 2013 | Print Page Tweet Anchorage, Alaska, circa 1983, looks and feels like a pioneer town in the Wild West in \"The Frozen Ground,\" Scott Walker's new crime thriller (and first feature). It's a town teeming with strip clubs, drug addiction, prostitution, and runaway girls whom nobody would miss if they went missing. And they do go missing, in droves. Based on the true story of Alaskan serial killer Robert Hansen (played here by John Cusack), and detective Glenn Flothe (named, in the film, Jack Holcombe, and played by Nicolas Cage) who, in investigating a series of missing persons reports as well as a couple of dead girls dug up by animals out in the wilderness, starts to wonder if all of these events aren't somehow connected. Advertisement \"The Frozen Ground\" trucks in cliche, as most serial killer and police procedural films do, but the strength of the acting (from the leads down to people with only one or two lines) helps ground the film. Filmed in a frenetic style, with gigantic moving frenzied closeups, and an almost total lack of establishing shots, \"The Frozen Ground\" is best when it lands, and stays, on the faces of the leads: Nicolas Cage, John Cusack, and Vanessa Hudgens. When we are looking at their faces, we don't need to be reminded of the stakes. They're there in plain view.It's hard to do something new in the serial killer genre, especially since the field is so over-saturated, from the 24/7 Investigation Discovery channel to \"Criminal Minds\"'s weekly obsession with how dangerous it is to be a woman because one minute you're walking down the street, minding your own business, the next minute you're chained up in a dungeon. All of those familiar elements are here. Jack Holcombe even has a resentful wife (Radha Mitchell), complaining to her husband about how hard he works, before doing an unmotivated about-face in a later scene. Why do movies so rarely know what to do with wives of workaholics? Why are they usually given the role of nag, before coming around in the final hour?\u00a0But \"The Frozen Ground\" is not trying to re-invent the wheel, and it also isn't trying to imitate \"Seven\" or \"Silence of the Lambs.\" It is interested in Holcombe's increasingly urgent investigation, and the pushback he receives from higher-ups who don't want to re-open what were considered to be closed cases. There's one shot of Nicolas Cage sitting in a dark office, staring up at a bulletin board, covered with snapshots of missing women. That one shot establishes so much: his feeling of urgency, the sense of how huge this thing could be if anyone could find the missing links, and the loneliness of his quest. Advertisement Robert Hansen's name may not be as well-known as Ted Bundy, or John Wayne Gacy, but his murderous spree in 1970s and 1980s Alaska puts him in the Serial Killer Pantheon. Despite a troubled and violent background with tons of red flags, Hansen was able to maneuver undetected in Anchorage for many years, abducting young women, raping them, taking them via private plane out into the inaccessible wilderness surrounding Anchorage and then hunting them like game. He was married, with kids. He worked as a baker. People liked him, but he was quiet and kept to himself. He had a great cover persona, as most of these characters do. Flothe finally got a warrant to search Hansen's house, and found an aviation map covered with X's, to mark the spot of his burial grounds. Many of the victims were never found. We'll never know the number of women he actually killed. Hansen was sentenced to 461 years in prison with no possibility of parole. Cindy Paulson (Vanessa Hudgens) is the teenage prostitute who managed to escape from Hansen's clutches, and went to the police to tell her story. She was not believed, because of her background. This is handled in a manner bordering on vaudeville, with one cop regaling a group of cops with the contemptuous comment, \"I mean, how can a prostitute be raped?\" They all laugh in agreement. This is not to say that such situations do not happen in police stations all the time, but the scene feels heavy-handed.The scenes between Nicolas Cage and Vanessa Hudgens are the film's best. Nicolas Cage is so grounded here, so real and simple. The whole film really hinges on Holcombe trying to make Cindy trust him so that she will testify and be a reliable witness, and this is where Cage shines. His entire performance is about two things only: thinking and listening. He has a power of listening that is totally authentic, and he is quite generous to his young co-star. He is not concerned with himself, because Jack Holcombe isn't either. He listens to Cindy talk on a level that could be described as subterranean, with a cop's instinct for what isn't being said. Advertisement And Cindy is, to put it mildly, a handful. She has a pimp (played by 50 Cent, who also is one of the producers of the film), but things have gone south in that relationship. She wanders up and down the \"Ho Stroll\" in Anchorage, and gets a job dancing in a strip club. She does coke and crystal meth. She has nowhere to live, and stands on the sidewalk in the driving snow. (There is a breathtaking scene that has nothing to do with anything else, where Cindy, alone on a deserted side street, comes across a gigantic moose, which has wandered into the city. Moose and Cindy stand for a while, staring at each other. The snow falls. It is a moment that is beyond meaning, beyond plot, reminiscent of the encounter with the deer on the railroad tracks at dawn in \"Stand By Me.\")John Cusack dials the burner down low, a smart choice, giving the character the guy-next-door persona which was so much a part of Hansen's successful M.O. When we see him in the flashbacks, with one of the girls he abducted (Gia Mantegna, in a gut-wrenching performance), he is calm, almost taciturn, even when he punches her in the head. He's almost kind and supportive with his victims, telling them they are \"good girls.\" Cusack has placed his voice at a very interesting part of his register, making him sound (and seem) benign. It's a voice that almost isn't there. He is a hunter, a predator. He has worked hard at his camouflage.Mixed in with the super fast hand-held action of the majority of the film are periodic aerial shots (Patrick Murguia is the cinematographer) of the forbidding Alaskan wilderness, mountains, glaciers, frozen rivers. These shots are constant reminders of what a vast field Hansen had to play in, and the impossibility of ever finding the missing. Popular Blog Posts Welcome to Women Writers Week 2019 Chaz Ebert & Nell Minow An introduction to Women Writers Week 2019. Who do you read? Good Roger, or Bad Roger? Roger Ebert This message came to me from a reader named Peter Svensland. He and a fr... Sexualized Innocence: Revisiting The Blue Lagoon Abbey Bender A look at how The Blue Lagoon both exploited and created the public persona of Brooke Shields, and how it plays 37 ye... Video Interview: Brie Larson, Lashana Lynch, Anna Boden and Ryan Fleck on Captain Marvel Katherine Tulich An exclusive video interview with the stars and co-directors of Captain Marvel, discussing female empowerment, friend... Popular Reviews Captain Marvel Leaving Neverland A Madea Family Funeral Alien: Covenant Reveal Comments Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus. comments powered by Disqus Advertisement Subscribe to our mailing list Enter Your Email Address Advertisement The Ebert Club is our hand-picked selection of content for Ebert fans. You will receive a weekly newsletter full of movie-related tidbits, articles, trailers, even the occasional streamable movie. Club members also get access to our members-only section on RogerEbert.com Premiere Member : $20.00USD - yearly Advertisement Reviews RSS Related Articles Pay the Ghost by Brian Tallerico In Theaters 3 Faces An Elephant Sitting Still Black Mother Captain Marvel Gloria Bell I'm Not Here Juanita The Kid Two Plains & a Fancy Leaving Neverland A Madea Family Funeral Apollo 11 Climax Giant Little Ones Greta Into the Dark: Treehouse Mapplethorpe Sharkwater: Extinction The Boy Who Harnessed the Wind The Hole in the Ground The Wedding Guest Transit We Die Young Woman at War How to Train Your Dragon: The Hidden World Paddleton Prosecuting Evil: The Extraordinary World of Ben Ferencz Run the Race The Changeover The Iron Orchard Alita: Battle Angel Birds of Passage Donnybrook Happy Death Day 2U Hotel by the River Isn't It Romantic Mega Time Squad Ruben Brandt, Collector Sorry Angel The Breaker Upperers The Wandering Earth Fighting with My Family Arctic Berlin, I Love You Cold Pursuit Everybody Knows High Flying Bird Lords of Chaos St. Agatha The Lego Movie 2: The Second Part The Man Who Killed Hitler and Then the Bigfoot The Prodigy To Dust Under the Eiffel Tower Untogether What Men Want Braid Daughter of Mine Into the Dark: Down Miss Bala Piercing Pig The Unicorn Then Came You Velvet Buzzsaw The Wild Pear Tree Breslin and Hamill: Deadline Artists King of Thieves Polar Serenity The Image Book The Invisibles The Kid Who Would Be King Movie Reviews Reviews Great Movies Blogs Roger Ebert's Journal Chaz's Journal MZS Channels Balder and Dash Demanders Far Flungers Thumbnails Interviews Festivals & Awards Sundance Life Itself Cannes Tributes to Roger Letters Opening Shots Project Empathy \u00a9 Copyright 2019, Ebert Digital LLC About the Site Contact Us Advertise with Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Movies by Letter Cast and Crew Like Us on Facebook Follow Us on Twitter RSS Feeds", "The Frozen Ground \u2013 review | Film | The Guardian Skip to main content The Guardian - Back to home Support The Guardian Available for everyone, funded by readers Contribute Subscribe Contribute Search jobs Sign in My account Comments & replies Public profile Account details Emails & marketing Membership Contributions Subscriptions Sign out Search switch to the US edition switch to the UK edition switch to the Australia edition switch to the International edition current edition: US edition News Opinion Sport Culture Lifestyle Show More News US news World news Environment Soccer US politics Business Tech Science Opinion The Guardian view Columnists Letters Opinion videos Cartoons Sport Soccer NFL Tennis MLB MLS NBA NHL Culture Film Books Music Art & design TV & radio Stage Classical Games Lifestyle Fashion Food Recipes Love & sex Home & garden Health & fitness Family Travel Money What term do you want to search? Search with google Make a contribution Subscribe US edition switch to the UK edition switch to the Australia edition switch to the International edition Search jobs Digital Archive Discount Codes The Guardian app Video Podcasts Pictures Newsletters Inside the Guardian Guardian Weekly Crosswords Facebook Twitter Search jobs Digital Archive Discount Codes Film Books Music Art & design TV & radio Stage Classical Games More Thrillers (film) The Frozen Ground \u2013 review 3 / 5 stars 3 out of 5 stars. Nicolas Cage, Vanessa Hudgens and John Cusack give solid performances in this Prime Suspect-like thriller Peter Bradshaw @PeterBradshaw1 Thu 18 Jul 2013 15.40\u00a0EDT First published on Thu 18 Jul 2013 15.40\u00a0EDT Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share via Email You know you're getting older when the policemen start looking younger, you have no idea what's at No 1 and John Cusack starts playing serial killers. To follow up his sweaty-sicko turn in The Paperboy, Cusack portrays Robert Hansen, a\u00a0mousy-looking family man in Alaska in 1983 who has a secret career in mass murder. On his trail is Sgt Jack Halcombe, played by Nicolas Cage with reasonable restraint and no sudden shouting, and Vanessa Hudgens is one of Hansen's targets who escaped and now faces the ordeal of testifying. There is some good Prime\u00a0Suspect-like tension here, with a neat cat-and-mouse psychological gamble with a certain piece of jewellery \u2013 and solid performances from Hudgens, Cage and Cusack. Topics Thrillers (film) John Cusack Nicolas Cage reviews Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share via Email Share on LinkedIn Share on Pinterest Share on WhatsApp Share on Messenger Reuse this content more on this story Nicolas Cage: 'People think I'm not in on the joke' The castles. The cars. The out-there acting. The 108-day marriage to Lisa Marie Presley. Nicolas Cage has a\u00a0reputation for\u00a0excess \u2013 but\u00a0we've got him all wrong, he\u00a0tells Emma Brockes Published: 20 Jul 2013 Nicolas Cage: 'People think I'm not in on the joke' The Frozen Ground - video review 4:00 Published: 19 Jul 2013 The Frozen Ground - video review John Cusack: from hearththrob to psychopath Published: 7 Jul 2013 John Cusack: from hearththrob to psychopath Most popular Film Books Music Art & design TV & radio Stage Classical Games About us Contact us Complaints & corrections Secure Drop Work for us Privacy policy Cookie policy \"\" Terms & conditions Help All topics All writers Digital newspaper archive Facebook Twitter Advertise with us Guardian Labs Search jobs Dating Discount Codes Support The\u00a0Guardian Available for everyone, funded by readers Contribute Subscribe Back to top \u00a9 2019 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. Close", "\u2018The Frozen Ground\u2019 Stars Nicolas Cage - The New York Times SectionsSEARCHSkip to contentSkip to site indexMoviesSubscribeLog InLog InToday\u2019s PaperMovies|People as the Big Game in an Alaskan HuntAdvertisementSupported byMovie ReviewPeople as the Big Game in an Alaskan HuntImageDean Norris, left, and Nicolas Cage in \u201cThe Frozen Ground.\u201dCreditCreditLionsgateThe Frozen GroundDirected by Scott WalkerBiography, Crime, History, ThrillerR1h 45mMore InformationBy Stephen HoldenAug. 22, 2013Does that worried look on the face of Nicolas Cage in \u201cThe Frozen Ground\u201d signal his realization that he is trapped in a police procedural that is not as good as an average episode of \u201cLaw and Order: Special Victims Unit\u201d? Could be, although the movie, the directorial feature debut of Scott Walker, is at least watchable, unlike recent debacles starring Mr. Cage, including \u201cStolen,\u201d \u201cGhost Rider: Spirit of Vengeance,\u201d \u201cTrespass,\u201d \u201cSeeking Justice\u201d and \u201cSeason of the Witch.\u201d His character, the Alaska state trooper Jack Halcombe, is a fictional stand-in for Glenn Flothe, a dogged investigator who solved the case of a serial killer revealed to have raped and murdered at least 17 young women, most in the sex industry, between 1971 and 1983. The killer, Robert Hansen (John Cusack), kept a map indicating where he had buried the victims in the wilderness after transporting them there in his small plane and hunting them like game. The story is set in 1983, when Halcombe, who is about to leave his post in Anchorage, is assigned to the case of a woman whose body was dug up by animals. Because of the case\u2019s similarities to earlier unsolved murders, Halcombe believes that the crimes are linked. The discovery coincides with the rape of Cindy Paulson (Vanessa Hudgens), an abused child and teenage runaway turned prostitute who says she was kidnapped and tortured by Hansen. She escaped his clutches as he tried to load her onto his plane. Mr. Cusack underacts the role of Hansen. He camouflages any sense of menace under a pose of a mildly aggrieved Everyman who allows that he has made mistakes in the past but insists that he couldn\u2019t possibly be the monster Halcombe makes him out to be. Because Hansen appears to be a solid citizen with an alibi, and the accuser is a prostitute, the police \u2014 portrayed here as lazy, cynical, misogynistic louts \u2014 dismiss her accusations. Even when Halcombe amasses reams of circumstantial evidence against Hansen, the police refuse to act. The movie\u2019s only fresh element is the wintry setting, which shrouds everything in a mood of weary fatalism. Otherwise, it\u2019s the same old, same old, efficiently discharged and utterly disposable. \u201cThe Frozen Ground\u201d is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian) for violence, sexual situations, nudity and drug use.The Frozen GroundDirectorScott WalkerWriterScott WalkerStarsNicolas Cage, Vanessa Hudgens, John Cusack, Dean Norris, Gia MantegnaRatingRRunning Time1h 45mGenresBiography, Crime, History, ThrillerMovie data powered by IMDb.comA version of this article appears in print on , on Page C9 of the New York edition with the headline: People as the Big Game In an Alaskan Hunt. Order Reprints | Today\u2019s Paper | SubscribeAdvertisementOpen in the appSite IndexGo to Home Page \u00bbnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingslistings & moreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountnewshome pageworldU.S.politicsNew Yorkbusinesstechscienceclimatesportsobituariesthe upshottoday's papercorrectionsopiniontoday's opinionop-ed columnistseditorialsop-ed Contributorsletterssunday reviewvideo: opinionartstoday's artsart & designbooksdancemoviesmusicPop Culturetelevisiontheaterwatchingvideo: artslivingautomobilescrosswordfoodCookingeducationstylehealthjobsmagazinereal estatet magazinetravelweddingsmoreReader CenterWirecutterLive EventsThe Learning Networktools & servicesN.Y.C. events guidemultimediaphotographyvideoNYT storetimes journeysmanage my accountSubscribehome deliverydigital subscriptionsCrosswordCookingemail newsletterscorporate subscriptionseducation ratemobile applicationsreplica editionSite Information Navigation\u00a9\u00a02019\u00a0The New York Times CompanyContact UsWork with usAdvertiseYour Ad ChoicesPrivacyTerms of ServiceTerms of SaleSite MapHelpHelpSubscriptions", "Review: 'Frozen Ground' fails to break the surface - Los Angeles Times Skip to content Topics xml:space=\"preserve\"> Subscriber Services Manage Subscription Newsletters EZPay Delivery Issue Subscriber Terms Local Earthquakes Data Desk California Times OC California Journal Education Readers' Representative Journal Local + L.A. Now Politics Business Company Town Autos Michael Hiltzik Consumer Confidential Business + Auto + Nation Politics Entertainment Arts & Culture Hero Complex Movies Television Music Gossip Envelope TV Listings Entertainment + Opinion Op-Ed Opinion L.A. Editorials Readers React Top of the Ticket Endorsements Food Sports Sports Now Dodgers Lakers USC UCLA Clippers Rams Chargers Boxing & MMA High School Varsity Times Angels Kings Soccer Ducks Olympics MLB NBA NFL More Sports World Afghanistan & Pakistan Africa Asia Brazil Europe Mexico & The Americas Middle East Obituaries Real Estate Hot Property California Living Fashion Health & Wellness L.A. Affairs Pets Home & Garden Books Health + Living Plus + Technology Science Science Now Travel Cruises Mexico & Latin America Theme Parks Travel + Visuals Graphics L.A. Times en Espa\u00f1ol Sabor EEUU Entretenimiento Internacional M\u00e9xico Pol\u00edtica Vida y Estilo Deportes E-Newspaper Design LA Extras Find/Post a job Games Comics Shop Los Angeles Times Archives Los Angeles Times Store Los Angeles Times Photos Local Ads Marketplace About Press Releases Staff Directory Search xml:space=\"preserve\"> Local Politics Sports Entertainment Opinion Place an ad Advertisement > Movies Now Review: 'Frozen Ground' fails to break the surface By By Gary Goldstein Aug 22, 2013 | 5:30 AM Chelle Ringell (Jodi Lyn O'Keefe) in \"The Frozen Ground.\" (Lionsgate) \"The Frozen Ground\" is a grim, undistinguished procedural thriller based on the true case of serial killer Robert Hansen who, from 1971 to 1983, abducted, raped and murdered at least 17 young women in Alaska. Although writer-director Scott Walker seems committed to not overly exploiting his lurid subject matter, the movie is just too dreary, disjointed and generically creepy to be persuasive. The story, set in 1983, finds upright Alaska state trooper Jack Halcombe (Nicolas Cage), reportedly an amalgam of several real-life characters, struggling to bring Hansen (John Cusack) to justice amid the apathy of other local investigators. Hansen, meanwhile, is pursuing 18-year-old prostitute Cindy (a game Vanessa Hudgens), his one victim who got away, while Halcombe is concurrently trying to protect and \u2014 awkwardly \u2014 befriend the erratic, messed up girl, who's vital to catching Hansen. Because we already know whodunit, the tension largely relies on how the elusive, deceptively meek Hansen will finally be cornered. And, although the film does gain momentum just prior to that showdown, much that comes before is so confusingly structured and choppily edited that viewers may have already checked out. As for those old \"Con Air\" co-stars Cage and Cusack, it's hard not to feel they're on paycheck patrol; these are depressingly bloodless turns. Radha Mitchell, as Halcombe's flip-flopping wife, Curtis \"50 Cent\" Jackson (one of many producers here), playing a bad-wigged pimp, and Jodi Lyn O'Keefe, authentic as a Brooklyn babe, also appear. ----------------------------- 'The Frozen Ground' MPAA Rating: R for violent content, sexuality/nudity, language and drug use. Running time: 1 hour, 45 minutes. Advertisement > Playing: At AMC's Burbank Town Center 8. Advertisement > Be the first to comment Hide Comments Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by SolidOpinion. Most Read L.A. Now \u2018Not just about a few kids\u2019: Nazi salutes and swastikas spark soul searching in O.C. 3h L.A. Now Sick marine mammals turning up on area beaches in droves 2h Column Lyft\u2019s IPO disclosure shows it\u2019s not close to profitability and has no good way to get there Mar 7, 2019 Column How badly are we being ripped off on eyewear? Former industry execs tell all Mar 5, 2019 Column To beat congestion, L.A. needs to charge drivers more. But how can it be done right? 6:30 AM Advertisement > Latest Movies Now 'Roma' stars break down the film's unique shooting style Feb 18, 2019 'A Star Is Born' dims in the shadow of Kavanaugh confirmation Oct 9, 2018 Unpopular 'popular film' Oscar is eliminated; festival favorites emerge Sep 7, 2018 Burt Reynolds' costars and admirers 'mourn one of our favorite leading men' Sep 6, 2018 'La La Land's' Damien Chazelle and 'Spotlight's' Josh Singer return to the Oscar race with 'First Man' Sep 2, 2018 Advertisement > > >", "The Frozen Ground, review - Telegraph Accessibility links Skip to article Skip to navigation Telegraph.co.uk Friday 08 March 2019 Home Video News World Sport Business Money Comment Culture Travel Life Women Fashion Luxury Tech Film Film TV and Radio Books Music Comedy Art Theatre Photography Dance Opera Hay Festival Glyndebourne Advertisement Home\u00bb Culture\u00bb Film\u00bb Film Reviews The Frozen Ground, review The Frozen Ground, a police procedural starring Nicolas Cage and John Cusack, is fist-gnawingly frustrating, says Tim Robey. 1 Nicolas Cage and Vanessa Hudgens in The Frozen Ground By Tim Robey 11:55AM BST 18 Jul 2013 Follow Dir: Scott Walker Stars: Nicolas Cage, John Cusack, Vanessa Hudgens, Curtis Jackson 15 cert, 105 min David Fincher\u2019s epic of loose ends, Zodiac (2007), might be the exception that proves the rule, but serial killer procedurals tend to gain nothing in intensity or moral sobriety simply by being \u201cbased on real events\u201d. For proof, you only need turn to The Frozen Ground. Might we call this dubious entertainment? Hardly: it\u2019s not even entertaining. Adapting the notorious case of a prolific sexual predator in Alaska called Robert Hansen (played by John Cusack), the movie recounts the state\u2019s faltering efforts to bring him to justice, which it structures so confusingly and badly it occasionally feels as though the Keystone Kops are running amok inside the lurid crime-thriller universe of James (Kiss the Girls) Patterson. Related Articles The wonderfully mad world of Nicolas Cage 03 Jul 2013 The World\u2019s End, review 09 Jul 2013 Play 11 Jul 2013 It starts with a small-time prostitute, Cindy Paulson (Vanessa Hudgens) narrowly escaping Hansen\u2019s clutches. Though she\u2019s meant to have become the clinching witness against him, the bulk of the film is spent with the authorities ignoring and discrediting her story with no other leads to go on \u2014 a situation which, though presumably faithful to the facts, is fist-gnawingly frustrating in terms of dramatic development. Only Nicolas Cage, as a dogged State Trooper called Jack Halcombe, successfully connects the dots and tries to bring Cindy into the investigation, also offering her his spare room while she recovers from the ordeal. Fans of Cage and Cusack, previously paired as unlikely allies in Con Air (1997), may be looking forward to a bit of deranged actorly combat once Hansen is cornered in the interrogation room, but it\u2019s here that this hopeless flick comes up especially short. Cage is on his dourest sorrows-of-the-world autopilot, and Cusack, who seems to have less and less to offer us at all these days, serves up a listless banality-of-evil cipher instead of a character. Beyond them, debut director Scott Walker is guilty of giving Radha Mitchell the most thankless role of her career as Cage\u2019s vaguely disgruntled wife, while rendering Curtis \u201c50 Cent\u201d Jackson even more than usually ridiculous by wigging him up, as Cindy\u2019s pimp, perhaps in homage to the shoulder-length hair of mid-1990s Angela Bassett. One person alone survives unscathed, and that\u2019s Hudgens, transparently but boldly gunning for serious actor kudos with the sort of endangered hooker role handed to Jane Fonda on a plate in Klute. You won\u2019t walk away from this film predicting an Oscar, exactly, but she\u2019s tough and committed in ways that often come to the rescue. Her solid contribution makes it all the more scandalous that Walker\u2019s camera insists on prowling around strip-bars when it\u2019s not even meant to be adopting Hansen\u2019s point of view, as if the great advantage of choosing misogynistic murder as your subject was its opportunity for a few topless peep-shows along the way. Follow @TelegraphFilm Start your free 30 day Amazon Prime trial\u00bb Film Reviews Culture \u00bb Tim Robey \u00bb Culture News \u00bb Culture Reviews \u00bb Film \u00bb In Film Reviews The best movies to watch Box office hits in 2014 Michael Keaton: 'Who are you calling a washed-up superhero?' The 80 best films on Netflix The best films in cinemas now Read more film reviews Advertisement Advertisement Film Galleries Clint Eastwood: 60 years in film 30 great closing lines in films Robin Williams: 50 great quotes Jennifer Lawrence in pictures The 49 best British films of all time Who gained or lost weight for films? Culture Video\u00bb Oscars 2016 highlights Chris Rock's funniest Oscars jokes Come Dine with Me producer wins Oscar Leo attends the Oscars after-party Lady Gaga sings with sexual abuse survivors Oscars 2016: Red carpet highlights More from the web Advertisement Advertisement More from the web LISTS AND QUOTES 80 great quotes about love and romance Books In Pictures - the story of love and romance: from Adam and Eve to Tinder and Chemsex. Compiled by Martin Chilton Great quotes about acting Film 50 great quotes about acting Who are the 50 best TV cops of all time? TV We countdown the best TV detectives and sleuths, from Maigret and McNulty to Scooby-Doo 30 great opening lines in literature 30 great one-liners More from the web World News The latest world news View US News Latest and breaking stories from the United States View Film All the latest film trailers, reviews and features View Football Catch up on all the latest football news and results View Back to top HOME Film Film Reviews Film News Books Book Reviews Book Shop Music Music Reviews Classical Music Music Video Music Festivals Opera Tickets TV and Radio TV Guide Theatre Theatre Reviews Art Dance Dating Culture News Picture Galleries Culture Video Culture Critics Photography Crossword Theatre Tickets Contact us Privacy and Cookies Advertising Fantasy Football Announcements Reader Prints Follow Us Apps Epaper Expat Promotions Subscriber Syndication \u00a9 Copyright of Telegraph Media Group Limited 2019 Terms and Conditions Today's News Archive Style Book Weather Forecast", "The Frozen Ground (2013) \u2013 Deep Focus Review \u2013 Movie Reviews, Critical Essays, and Film Analysis Reviews The Definitives Calendar Re(focused)views Patreon Search for: The Frozen Ground 1.5 Stars\u2606\u2606\u2606\u2606 Review by Brian Eggert August 24, 2013 Director Scott Walker Cast Nicolas Cage, John Cusack, Vanessa Hudgens, Dean Norris, Radha Mitchell, 50 Cent, Kevin Dunn Rated R Runtime 105 min. Release Date 08/23/2013 Writer-director Scott Walker explores by-the-numbers true crime in The Frozen Ground, the story of real-life Detective Glenn Flothe, the investigator who solved the case of Alaska\u2019s most prolific serial killer. Between 1971 and 1983, rapist and murderer Robert Hansen stalked and killed somewhere between 17 and 21 young women, most of them young prostitutes lured by Hansen\u2019s promise of a $300 photo shoot. Flothe\u2019s work helped catch Hansen in 1983, and today the serial killer is serving a 461-year prison sentence. In his debut feature, Walker sticks to a standard outline for such material and doesn\u2019t delve deep enough into his protagonist\u2019s life and how it was affected by the case, resulting in a lack of interest in this watchable, but ultimately uninvolving procedural. Nicolas Cage plays State Trooper Jack Holcombe, a fictionalized version of Flothe, whereas many of the other principal characters go by their real-life names. Why, you might ask, was Flothe\u2019s name changed? Perhaps because Walker takes certain liberties with the character\u2019s personal life in a (failed) attempt to heighten his emotional involvement in the case. Nevertheless, Holcombe feels decidedly one-note. The film opens in 1983 with just two weeks left before Holcombe leaves his Anchorage post with his wife (Radha Mitchell) and young daughter. As his last case, Holcombe is assigned to look into the death of an unidentified woman whose body has been found in the wilderness, and the circumstances are such that Holcombe makes a connection to a series of unsolved murders and disappearances in the area since 1971. All evidence points to mild-mannered local Bob Hansen (John Cusack), whose rap sheet features rape and kidnapping, but it\u2019s all circumstantial. The discovery of the body also aligns with the testimony of Cindy Paulson (Vanessa Hudgens), a teenage runaway-turned-prostitute who claims Hansen handcuffed, raped, and attempted to kidnap her. At the last minute, she escaped as he tried to load her onto his airplane, but the interviewing police are quick to dismiss her claims, given her status as a street walker. Holcombe isn\u2019t so quick to overlook Cindy\u2019s accusation, however. And so, he tries to rescue the girl from her street life, while simultaneously investigating Hansen, who\u2019s been careful not to leave any concrete evidence. Cusack looks thin and pale as Hansen, but the script doesn\u2019t explore the character enough to make him anything more than a thinly veiled monster. With black eyes and a den of taxidermied animals to echo Norman Bate\u2019s office in Psycho, Cusack\u2019s Hansen seems like an Average Joe and, even after he\u2019s exposed, he\u2019s somewhat muted and never turns into a shocking or scary figure. Walker quickly dispels any second guesses by revealing Hansen\u2019s true nature early on, missing an opportunity for suspense. Hudgens, meanwhile, becomes another in a series of child stars who attempt to announce their adult credibility as an actress by playing a sexualized hooker-with-a-heart-of-gold. This role could have been something akin to Jodie Foster in Taxi Driver, but instead, it\u2019s more like Anne Hathaway in Havoc. Rapper and co-producer 50 Cent gives another wooden performance in the role of Cindy\u2019s pimp. Mitchell is underused as a nagging wife. Breaking Bad\u2018s Dean Norris also appears as Holcombe\u2019s right-hand man. As for Cage, there\u2019s nothing worse than when this energetic actor is assigned to dry material, and The Frozen Ground certainly qualifies as such. Comparable to Cage\u2019s recent turns in Seeking Justice, Stolen, and Trespass, the actor sleeps through his performance, but at least doesn\u2019t offer any embarrassing scenes that will later appear in a derisive gag reel on YouTube. Walker\u2019s dull approach proceeds steadily, veering off during the middle into Alaska\u2019s underground sex industry, but never requires too much effort from the viewer. With some thirty (!) credited producers and executive producers on this project, you\u2019d think one of them would question why Walker\u2019s script was so unexciting or dramatically staid, but you\u2019d be wrong. Only Patrick Murguia\u2019s on-location photography of the Alaskan wilderness holds any notable merit. Lionsgate has doomed the film to a limited theatrical release to coincide with its VOD debut, and it\u2019s not difficult to understand why. Related Titles Good Time (2017) 4 Stars\u2606\u2606\u2606\u2606 High and Low (1963) The Definitives Mission: Impossible \u2013 Rogue Nation (2015) 3.5 Stars\u2606\u2606\u2606\u2606 Jaws (1975) The Definitives The Talented Mr. Ripley (1999) The Definitives Patreon Recent Reviews Leaving Neverland 3.5 Stars\u2606\u2606\u2606\u2606 Greta 3 Stars\u2606\u2606\u2606 How to Train Your Dragon: The Hidden World 3 Stars\u2606\u2606\u2606 The Wandering Earth 2 Stars\u2606\u2606 Alita: Battle Angel 3 Stars\u2606\u2606\u2606 Assassination Nation 2 Stars\u2606\u2606 What Men Want 2.5 Stars\u2606\u2606\u2606 High Flying Bird 3.5 Stars\u2606\u2606\u2606\u2606 Velvet Buzzsaw 2 Stars\u2606\u2606 Stan & Ollie 3.5 Stars\u2606\u2606\u2606\u2606 The Kid Who Would Be King 2.5 Stars\u2606\u2606\u2606 King of Thieves 2 Stars\u2606\u2606 Glass 1.5 Stars\u2606\u2606 Let the Sunshine In 4 Stars\u2606\u2606\u2606\u2606 Escape Room 2 Stars\u2606\u2606 Vice 2 Stars\u2606\u2606 Recent Articles After Six Months of Alamo Drafthouse, I Love Going to Movies Again Demystifying the Myth: The Western\u2019s Classical Phase Sundance Recap and Reviews - Part 3 The Definitives: Terrorizers Reader's Choice: Audition Sundance Recap and Reviews \u2013 Part 2 Sundance Recap and Reviews - Part 1 The Definitives: Gosford Park Classical Hollywood Cinema Reader's Choice: A Place in the Sun The Definitives: Raising Arizona Reader's Choice: Get Carter Top 10 Films of 2018 Twitter Facebook RSS Main Home Archive Calendar Reviews Reviews A-Z The Definitives Re(focused)views Book Reviews Features Collections Film Editorials On Moviegoing Lists Top 10 Films of 2018 Top 10 Films of 2017 Top 10 Films of 2016 View All Learn More About DFR Bibliography Contact Us Privacy Policy Social Patreon Donate Facebook Twitter RSS Deep Focus Review \u00a9\u00a02006-2018. All rights reserved.", "'The Frozen Ground' review Search Latest News TV TV Doctor Who Game of Thrones The Walking Dead US TV US TV Netflix Arrowverse Star Trek: Discovery WWE Reality TV Reality TV Strictly Come Dancing The Voice UK Dancing on Ice Britain's Got Talent Soaps Soaps Coronation Street EastEnders Emmerdale Hollyoaks Neighbours Home & Away Casualty Holby City Movies Movies Trailers Marvel Worlds of DC Star Wars Showbiz Tech Tech Tech Deals Forums TV Movies Soaps Tech NOW TV Forums Follow Type keyword(s) to search 'The Frozen Ground' review: Cage, Cusack and Hudgens in tense thriller Solid performances bolster this shocking true tale of an Alaskan serial killer. By Ben Rawson-Jones 19/07/2013 Director: Scott Walker; Screenwriter: Scott Walker; Starring: Nicolas Cage, Vanessa Hudgens (interview), John Cusack, Radha Mitchell, Curtis Jackson ;Running time: 105 mins; Certificate: 15 Based on the shocking true tale of a serial killer who terrorised Alaska, The Frozen Ground is an admirable thriller bursting with tension and superb turns by its stars Vanessa Hudgens, Nicolas Cage and John Cusack. Set in 1983, the grim tale concentrates on battered teenage prostitute Cindy (Hudgens), who tells police she escaped from the clutches of a local man intent on killing her. The testimony is largely derided, but state trooper Jack Halcombe (Cage) believes she could hold the key to solving the mystery behind the bodies of young ladies that have been found buried beneath the ice. But Jack's attempts to question shady animal hunter Robert Hansen (Cusack) do not go to plan, nor do his efforts to keep Cindy off the dangerous streets. The centre of the movie is Jack, who provides a beacon of consistency and morality from which to define everyone else. Jack's idealism provides a fascinating juxtaposition with Cindy's cynicism as their platonic relationship grows, while his moral imperative is the opposite of Robert's unflinchingly sadistic \u00e2\u20ac\u201c but equally driven \u00e2\u20ac\u201c disposition. When the two men meet, it's electric. Just don't expect Cusack to ask his former Con Air co-star whether the bunny's still in the box. Nicolas Cage highlights his versatility as an actor with a superbly understated portrayal that's far detached from his more histrionic performances, but still manages to be steeped in the subtle intensity required for the part. As for Cusack, he continues to impress playing against type \u00e2\u20ac\u201c much like in The Paperboy - as a dead-eyed psychopath. Emmett/Furla Films The plaudits are shared by Hudgens, who encapsulates the child-like wonder of Cindy (especially in one magical scene when she encounters a reindeer while trawling the streets for business) while bringing out her emotionally damaged nature and self-destructive compulsions. It's often harrowing to watch, which speaks volumes not just for her performance but for the smartly written script. The multi-layered 'cat and mouse' dynamics, featuring plenty of pursuits in the snow, are well orchestrated by director Scott Walker. One POV shot from the eyes of a rapidly dying young victim is particularly haunting. There's also the added bonus of seeing Breaking Bad's Hank - actor Dean Norris \u00e2\u20ac\u201c back on his two feet as a law enforcer again in a supporting role. Unlike the killer's relentlessly accurate gunshots, The Frozen Ground does miss the mark on several occasions. Radha Mitchell is underused in a token role as John's wife, which seems to be the recurring fate of this poor actress after experiencing a similar fate in Olympus Has Fallen. Curtis '50 Cent' Jackson fails to fully convince as Cindy's pimp, appearing far too affable and lacking a sense of urgency despite his repugnant actions. Emmett/Furla Films The decision to give the movie a specific focus on the events of 1983 works both for and against it. The relevant disappearances and body discoveries in Alaska in the years prior to Hansen meeting Cindy are efficiently encapsulated within the opening scenes. Crucially, this affords the narrative time to explore the Cindy and Jack's characters along with their interesting dynamic. Yet when the time is up, there is an overriding sense of dissatisfaction at how the ensuing events in their lives (and Hansen's) are dealt with. In a brief prologue, we're shown snippets of the aftermath interspersed with masses of text detailing what happened next and the eventual fates of the characters. The payoff feels too abrupt after everything we've witnessed and the superb work by cast and crew to generate such tension leading into the home straight. In his first feature film, writer/director Scott Walker doesn't quite manage to deliver the masterpiece that could have been with more confidence in a lengthier running time \u00e2\u20ac\u201c and it's not often film critics want movies to sail past the two-hour mark. But it's still a very assured debut, foregrounding character and performance ahead of plot mechanics to ensure The Frozen Ground is a largely affecting and engrossing account of the moralistic and malevolent aspects of the human condition and the justice system. 4 Advertisement - Continue Reading Below More From Reviews Anna and the Apocalypse is must-see Christmas film Wreck-It Ralph 2 review: Hilarious & heartwarming Advertisement - Continue Reading Below Girl in the Spider's Web: Lisbeth's a superhero Does Fantastic Beasts 2 recapture Potter magic? Bohemian Rhapsody review: Not (quite) a kind of magic Does the new Halloween movie live up to the hype? First Man review: Does Ryan Gosling achieve liftoff? Bad Times At the El Royale: A messy but stylish noir Life Is Strange 2 episode 1 review: Road trip Venom review: Does Tom Hardy's superhero measure up? Reviews Movies Reviews Movies 'The Frozen Ground' debuts trailer Cage in 'Frozen Ground' trailer - watch Nicolas Cage, John Cusack to star in 'The Frozen Ground'? 50 Cent to play pimp in 'Frozen Ground' Nicolas Cage denies 'stalking' Hudgens Cage gets damages over stalking report Curtis Jackson Radha Mitchell John Cusack dean norris Scott Walker Nicolas Cage Vanessa Hudgens Thriller US TV Movies Soaps Forums Reality TV Showbiz Gaming LGBTQ+ Spy Music Tech Deals Comics Netflix Marvel Game of Thrones Strictly Come Dancing DIGITAL SPY, PART OF THE HEARST UK ENTERTAINMENT NETWORK Digital Spy participates in various affiliate marketing programs, which means we may get paid commissions on editorially chosen products purchased through our links to retailer sites. \u00a92019 Hearst UK is the trading name of the National Magazine Company Ltd, 30 Panton Street, Leicester Square, London, SW1Y 4AJ. Registered in England. All Rights Reserved Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Cookie Policy Complaints Sitemap", "The Frozen Ground | Film | The Guardian Turn autoplay off Turn autoplay on Please activate cookies in order to turn autoplay off Jump to content [s] Jump to site navigation [0] Jump to search [4] Terms and conditions [8] Edition: UK US AU Your activity Email subscriptions Account details Linked services Sign out Profile Beta About us About us, Contact us Press office Guardian Print Centre Guardian readers' editor Observer readers' editor Terms of service Privacy policy Advertising guide Digital archive Digital edition Guardian Weekly Buy Guardian and Observer photos Today's paper Main section G2 features Comment and debate Editorials, letters and corrections Obituaries Other lives Sport EducationGuardian Subscribe Subscribe News Sport Comment Culture Business Money Life & style Travel Environment Tech TV Video Dating Offers Jobs Culture Film The Frozen Ground Details: 2013, USA, Cert 15, 105 mins Direction: Scott Walker Genre: Crime Summary: True life crime story about woman who helped catch serial killer Robert Hansen. With: John Cusack,\u00a0Nicolas Cage,\u00a0Radha Mitchell and Vanessa Hudgens Our reviews Philip French Nicolas Cage and John Cusack star in an efficient thriller based on a real-life hunt for a serial killer, writes Philip French Peter Bradshaw Nicolas Cage, Vanessa Hudgens and John Cusack give solid performances in this Prime Suspect-like thriller, writes Peter Bradshaw User reviews Read user reviews Related articles Nicolas Cage: 'People think I'm not in on the joke' The castles. The cars. The out-there acting. The 108-day marriage to Lisa Marie Presley. Nicolas Cage has a\u00a0reputation for\u00a0excess \u00e2\u0080\u0093 but\u00a0we've got him all wrong, he\u00a0tells Emma Brockes The Frozen Ground - video review Video (4min 00sec), Xan Brooks, Peter Bradshaw and Henry Barnes review a thriller about the real-life hunt for Robert Hansen, an Alaskan serial killer who murdered at least 17 women in the early 1980s The Frozen Ground: watch the trailer - video Video (1min 51sec), Watch the trailer for The Frozen Ground, a thriller about the real-life hunt for Alaskan serial killer Robert Hansen Today's best video The week in TV Telly addict Andrew Collins casts his critical eye over New Worlds (above), Klondike, The Trip to Italy, Endeavour and Monkey Planet 'Get your arse out, mate' Leah Green turns the tables on everyday sexism Spanish football player's stunning solo goal A player from Arosa scores a Maradona-like goal Whitewater kayaking: 'I wanted to spend every day on the river' Freestyle athlete takes us through his career On Film Most viewed Latest Last 24 hours 1. Quiz: Can you match each of these Bond villains with their own evil plot? 2. Star Wars Episode VII: what we know as shooting starts 3. The Goonies sequel confirmed by director Richard Donner 4. After Gremlins and The Goonies, what other 80s films need a remake? 5. My guilty pleasure: Trading Places More most viewed Last 24 hours 1. Cate Blanchett sets her sights on Sutton Hoo drama The Dig 2. Quiz: Can you match each of these Bond villains with their own evil plot? 3. Russian cinemas fined for showing The Wolf of Wall Street 4. 2 States and screen kisses: 'Bollywood is cranking it up a notch' 5. After Gremlins and The Goonies, what other 80s films need a remake? All today's stories Follow NSA-related developments as controversy over leaks continues to make headlines Film search Latest reviews Noah review \u00e2\u0080\u0093 'a preposterous but endearingly unhinged epic' Russell Crowe wrestles angels and demons in Darren Aronofsky's $125m mashup of the ancient story of Noah, writes Mark Kermode Honour review \u00e2\u0080\u0093 Shan Khan's 'conflicted' first feature The Double review \u00e2\u0080\u0093 Richard Ayoade's dark doppelganger drama Divergent review \u00e2\u0080\u0093 lacks lustre and grit A Story of Children and Film review \u00e2\u0080\u0093 Mark Cousins's 'spine-tingling' visual essay More film reviews Sponsored feature Across the site Film reviews Film news Film trailers Film show Video interviews License/buy our content | Privacy policy | Terms & conditions | Advertising guide | Accessibility | A-Z index | Inside the Guardian blog | About us | Work for us | Join our dating site today \u00a9 2014 Guardian News and Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved.", "Movieguide reviews the thriller FROZEN GROUND Reviews Movie Reviews In Theaters TV Reviews Articles Award Nominees Videos Red Carpet Interviews Now News Top 10 Year Genre Holiday Theme Recommended Donate Search Reviews Movie Reviews In Theaters TV Reviews Articles Award Nominees Videos Red Carpet Interviews Now News Top 10 Year Genre Holiday Theme Recommended Donate HomeReviewsTHE FROZEN GROUND \"Redeeming Lost Women\"Quality: Content: -2 \"EXTREME CAUTION\"NoneLightModerateHeavyLanguage Violence Sex Nudity Summary:THE FROZEN GROUND stars Nicolas Cage in the story of a conscientious police sergeant who must gain the trust of a young lady caught up in the sex trade to catch a serial killer. An absorbing, redemptive crime thriller, THE FROZEN GROUND conveys the importance of looking out for the weakest members of society with Christ-like conviction, but features extremely explicit content, making it inappropriate for families.Review:THE FROZEN GROUND gives a chilling look at the hunt for the notorious real-life serial predator, Robert Hansen (John Cusack), who preyed upon women in the 1970s and 80s in Alaska. Set in 1983, the story follows loving father and husband Sgt. Jack Holcombe (played by Nicolas Cage). Jack pours over case files, leads his fellow officers and combs the streets to track down Cindy Paulson (Vanessa Hudgens). As the sole surviving victim who\u2019s escaped the serial predator\u2019s clutches, Cindy\u2019s testimony is crucial to put away a killer who\u2019s slipped past police hands too many times. Though not a Christian movie per se, THE FROZEN GROUND begins by displaying Matthew 10:16 on-screen: \u201cBehold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves,\u201d while ominous music floats overhead. Then, it plunges viewers into a post-crime sequence in the city of Anchorage, Alaska. As the movie progresses, Sgt. Holcombe and his partners comb the gritty streets where prostitutes work, doggedly searching for Cindy. The officers also question people in strip clubs, all in the name of finding her and tracking the serial killer\u2019s victims. THE FROZEN GROUND is a well constructed, absorbing crime thriller. However, the police visits to strip clubs to find the serial killer\u2019s one surviving victim and to track the killer\u2019s movements contains blatant scenes of female nudity in lewd, sexually-objectifying bars. That said, the script treats the subject of murder and the vulnerability of the women\u2019s welfare seriously, however. For instance, the dancers\u2019 nakedness reveals their sad, dehumanized state. The movie doesn\u2019t paint their workplaces as attractive, but as places that debase women and the men who frequent such places. The level and amount of nudity necessitates the most extreme caution, even though it realistically shows how women are debased in such horrid environments. Such degrading places reflects the ugly tone that surrounds real women in these environments night after night across the U.S. and the rest of the world, in cities and rural areas alike. Much of THE FROZEN GROUND surrounds the heartfelt search by Holcomb and his fellow officers. However, a couple brief scenes contain CSI-type gore, visually depicting a decrepit body. Also, MOVIEGUIDE\u00ae issues a strong caution regarding a few detailed conversations about sexual situations and about rape. These acts aren\u2019t shown, but the alarmingly graphic specifics keep THE FROZEN GROUND from being family friendly. After sifting out the chaff, THE FROZEN GROUND tells a strong story of a policeman who works to find Cindy and shelter her with the sincere care and attention of a father. In one argument with a close relative who scoffs at the lengths he goes to in order to save the girl, Cage\u2019s character responds with a line that reflects powerful, Christ-like love. Also, Cindy\u2019s statements and questions about her own family background pointedly speak to the importance of making sure all children have a responsible, protective mother and father. Cage\u2019s portrayal of Sgt. Holcombe believably shows a determined officer and tender family man. His deep respect for human life fuels him to dig through the frozen ground of old cases new and old in order to stop Hansen in his tracks. A poignant, nearly silent, scene where Cindy encounters a wild animal stands in stark contrast to the ugliness of the world she lives in and the situations with Hansen she and others have undergone. Writer/director Scott Walker makes a wonderful, creative decision to incorporate this method of showing such a comparison between the complex sin man creates and the simple, natural beauty of God\u2019s creation. Perhaps similar to SAVING PRIVATE RYAN, THE FROZEN GROUND contains a very good story, but also very explicit content\u00a0\u2013 though the content here is sparsely dotted through the movie. MOVIEGUIDE\u00ae recommends viewing other selections and websites for less salacious and more informative information on prostitution and sex trafficking issues. See our reviews of the narrative movie TRADE OF INNOCENTS and the documentary NEFARIOUS. Like pornography, sex trafficking is a scourge in society that preys on the weak and the young. Content:(BB, C, LLL, VV, SS, NN, A, DD, M) Strong moral worldview with light Christian, redemptive elements about catching a real-life serial killer includes police detective hero is a loving father and husband, good eventually defeats evil, movie quotes Matthew 10:16 onscreen, and dignity/worth is given to lost women involved in prostitution; at least 35 obscenities and profanities (including some \u201cf\u201d words and strong profanities); strong violence includes men beaten and shot, discussion of sexual and brutal violence crimes against women, images of a decomposed murder victim, brief images of kidnapping and violence against one woman victim; strong sexual content includes scenes set in strip clubs, and prostitution details and sexual violence toward women and murder victims are discussed and alluded to in the dialogue; upper and rear female nudity in strip clubs; some alcohol use; smoking and a person facilitates use of an illicit drug and two people use the drug; and, kidnapping.In Brief:THE FROZEN GROUND stars Nicholas Cage as determined police sergeant Jack Holcombe trying to track down a serial killer. Jack must gain the trust of a young woman caught in the sex trade to catch the killer. As the movie progresses, he and his partners comb the gritty streets where prostitutes work, doggedly searching for Cindy. The officers also question people in strip clubs, all in the name of finding her and tracking the serial killer\u2019s movements. THE FROZEN GROUND is based on a true story. It contains brief, but very explicit, scenes. However, it tells a story for adult viewers that\u2019s contemporary, yet timeless and redemptive. The story features a heroic policeman on a dogged, gritty search for a madman. This hero carries a heart of gold to protect and redeem a portion of society that many have thrown away. His deep respect for human life fuels his determination to dig through the frozen ground of old cases new and old to stop a vicious serial killer. It\u2019s the explicit details, however, that keep THE FROZEN GROUND from being family friendly.Want more content like this? Make a donation to Movieguide\u00ae $10 $25 $50 $100 Donate Why Science Fiction Needs GodLord Have Mercy on Miley Cyrus and HollywoodRelated Posts BATMAN & ROBIN THE BORROWERS THE MUSTANG CATS DON\u2019T DANCE UNPLANNED Video Review MRS. BROWN Movieguide DonateMovieguide\u00ae is a 501c3 non-profit. We are only able to make a difference because of your generous support. DONATE TODAY! Release Date: Starring: Nicholas Cage, John Cusack, Vanessa Hudgens, Dean Norris, Kevin Dunn, Jodi Lyn O\u2019Keefe, Katherine LaNasa, Ryan O\u2019Nan, Radha Mitchell, , Curtis \u201c50 Cent\u201d Jackson Genre: Thriller Audience: Adults Rating: R Runtime: 105 minutes Distributor: Lionsgate Films Director: Scott Walker Executive Producer: George Furla, Stepan Martirosyan, Kevin Frakes, Martin Richard Blencowe, Mark Stewart, Brandt Andersen, Brett Granstaff, Corey Large, Ted Fox, Elisa Salinas, Daniel Wagner, Fredrik Malmberg, Olga Valentina, Barry Brooker, Stan Wertlieb Producer: Mark Ordesky, Jane Fleming, Randall Emmett, Curtis Jackson, Remington Chase, Jeff Rice Writer: Scott Walker Address Comments To: Jon Feltheimer, CEO, Lionsgate Films AKA Lions Gate Films (Summit Entertainment/Roadside Attractions) 2700 Colorado Ave. Santa Monica, CA 90404 Phone: (310) 449-9200; Fax: (310) 255-3870; Website: www.lionsgatefilms.com Latest Reviews MR. MAGOO BATMAN & ROBIN THE BORROWERS WIDE AWAKE MRS. BROWN Popular Videos THE SHACK Video Review 3 Reasons for I\u2019M NOT ASHAMED Over 13 REASONS WHY THE LIGHT BETWEEN OCEANS Video Review THE CASE FOR CHRIST Video Review HACKSAW RIDGE Video Review Newsletter About Us About Dr. Baehr About MOVIEGUIDE\u00ae Advertise With Us What The Ratings Mean Speaking Engagements Contact Us Press Awards MOVIEGUIDE\u00ae Awards Kairos Prize Chronos Prize Epiphany Prizes Grace Award Extras Careers Internships Pray For Hollywood Classes Radio Newsletter Extension Books Policies Terms of Use Privacy Policy Sitemap Follow Movieguide\u00ae Copyright \u00a9 2018 by Movieguide\u00ae", "The Frozen Ground Review - IGN Browse Xbox One Xbox 360 PS4 PS3 Vita Nintendo PC Mobile Movies TV Tech Comics Reviews Upcoming Videos Wikis + Cheats Podcasts Boards Trailers IGN on YouTube IGN on Facebook IGN on Twitter MORE Browse Shows Every Wednesday at 3pm PT Beyond! Days Gone Hands-On Impressions play latest Game Scoop! Unlocked Beyond! Nintendo Voice Chat IGN Unfiltered Daily Fix Prepare To Try HotKeys more shows Up At Noon Fireteam Chat IGN Every Ever Linked Together IGN Spotlight IGN Access IGN Plays Every Friday at 3PM! Game Scoop! Anthem & Games-as-a-Disservice play latest Every Friday Nintendo Voice Chat Is Nintendo's 3DS Knocking on Death's Door - NVC 447 play latest Every Tuesday at 3pm PT / 6pm ET Unlocked The Disc-Less Xbox One: Price Predictions and More play latest Reviews PS4 Xbox PC Nintendo Movies TV Tech Esports \u00d7 You've Come This Far... \u00d7 IGN us Big Story Yoshi's Crafted World 'Weighing Acorns' Stage Revealed Reviews Netflix's Triple Frontier Review The Frozen Ground Review Trending Today Netflix's Triple Frontier Review Captain Marvel Review Advertisement Green Book Review Fighting With My Family Review How to Train Your Dragon: The Hidden World Review Happy Death Day 2U Review Alita: Battle Angel Review The Lego Movie 2: The Second Part Review Extremely Wicked, Shockingly Evil and Vile Review I Want to Eat Your Pancreas Review Cold Pursuit Review The Man Who Killed Hitler and Then The Bigfoot Review Netflix's Velvet Buzzsaw Review Miss Bala Review Reign of the Supermen Review Netflix's Polar Review Netflix's FYRE: The Greatest Party That Never Happened Review Netflix's IO Review Glass Review Review by Max Nicholson More From The Frozen Ground Movie Review / 23 Aug 2013 4:23 PM PDT The Frozen Ground Review Share. A forgettable crime thriller with solid performances. By Max Nicholson Writer-director Scott Walker's The Frozen Ground is the true story of Alaskan State Trooper Jack Holcolme (Nicolas Cage), who resolves to stop the murderous rampage of serial killer Robert Hansen (John Cusack). When the bodies of street prostitutes begin piling up in Anchorage, Holcolme makes it his personal mission to find evidence against Hansen before the next body surfaces. During his investigation, Holcolme meets Cindy Paulsen (Vanessa Hudgens), one of Hansen's many kidnapped victims -- but the only one who has lived to tell about it. Armed with knowledge of the previous murders, Cindy's key information gives Holcolme the edge he needs to trail Hansen's crimes. The only question is if he can put the pieces together in time. Exit Theatre Mode Acting-wise, the real standout in The Frozen Ground is Cage, who delivers a refreshing performance as Holcolme. Unlike some of his other recent characters, Cage's turn as an Alaskan State Trooper is focused and relatable. Holcolme is not the same generic action star that Cage has often played, but rather an honest authority figure that's plainly good at his job. As viewers, we see Holcolme struggle with the case, both practically and emotionally, and Cage conveys that frustration with sincerity. Meanwhile, Holcolme's home life remains somewhat underdeveloped, particularly with his wife, who only appears on screen for a sum total of about five minutes; but even those scenes strike a chord to some extent, as they only add to Holcolme's internal conflict. That said, we never see his role as a father and husband play directly into the story, and as a result the character doesn't feel quite whole. Surprisingly, Hudgens also does fine work as the damaged prostitute-turned-stripper Cindy, who ends up playing a much more significant role than initially suspected. Alone, Hudgens doesn't evoke anything special, but her scenes with Cage are very strong, and their relationship becomes the driving force behind the characters, adding depth to both of their story arcs. Really, this is where Cage's Holcolme flourishes as a caring person. Likewise, Cusack does an excellent job portraying the deranged Robert Hansen. Unlike in most crime thrillers, the actor has almost equal screen time to Cage, though Cusack's scenes are much more understated. Hansen rarely speaks as he meticulously plans every step of his murders, covering his tracks along the way. We get a glimpse into his thought process firsthand, and we get a distinct sense of the killer inside him as the film progresses. Even when he's not in the company of his victims, Cusack's character chills. But perhaps even more disturbing than the scenes where he's alone are the ones where he's interacting with his friends and family. The exchanges he shares with his wife and kids are especially unsettling, and Cusack effortlessly transitions between the two drastically different sides of Hansen's coin. Naturally, it takes some time before Cusack and Cage are put in a room together -- and admittedly, their shared screen time is short-lived -- but when they do finally come face to face, it's the highlight of the film. In general, the performances here are solid. It's Scott Walker's script that is Frozen Ground's fatal flaw. While the characters are fairly engaging, the film's straightforward presentation and by-the-numbers procedural style are boring and forgettable. In terms of story, this crime thriller barely stacks up to an average episode of NCIS. Though it's based on a true story, it seems that The Frozen Ground fails to take any creative liberties or play to its strengths. As much as the actors attempt to infuse life into the story, ultimately, you'll probably forget about the plot and how each character got from one place to the next. Beyond its star power, The Frozen Ground is a cold and dreary drama that has little going for it. The narrative isn't muddled or confusing per se (in fact, it may be too simple), but it is certainly bland and a bit predictable. Nevertheless, Cage and Cusack are definite draws, and their commanding screen presences may justify a ticket purchase for some. The Verdict Scott Walker's The Frozen Ground features strong performances from stars Nicolas Cage, John Cusack, and even Vanessa Hudgens. Unfortunately, their collective screen presence doesn't elevate the film's boring, by-the-numbers script, which is easy to follow, but ultimately forgettable. Max Nicholson is a writer for IGN, and he desperately seeks your approval. Show him some love by following @Max_Nicholson on Twitter, or MaxNicholson on IGN. IN THIS ARTICLE The Frozen Ground Releases Aug. 23rd, 2013 theater Okay The Frozen Ground boasts strong performances from Nic Cage and John Cusack, but its script is bland and forgettable. 23 Aug 2013 Great performances from Cage and Cusack. Interesting characters. Bland, procedural storyline. 6.8 i Read our review standards Buying Guide Powered by IGN Deals IGN Recommends I Was Hacked in 2014 and I'm Still Feeling the Effects Devil May Cry 5 Review Don't Miss This Important Captain Marvel Cameo Netflix's After Life Season 1 Review Shazam! First Reactions Twitter Roundup Captain Marvel Post-Credits Scenes Explained Daily Deals: 26% off Devil May Cry 5 for PC Let's Go's Partner Pokemon Feature Could Be in Sword and Shield \u00a9 1996-2019 Ziff Davis, LLC Join the IGN Newsletter Contact Us Careers Advertise Accessibility Support Terms of Use AdChoices We encourage you to read our updated PRIVACY POLICY and COOKIE POLICY. \u00d7", "The Frozen Ground - Wikipedia The Frozen Ground From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search The Frozen GroundPoster for The Frozen GroundDirected byScott WalkerProduced by50 Cent Randall Emmett George Furla Mark Ordesky Jane FlemingWritten byScott WalkerStarringNicolas Cage John Cusack Vanessa HudgensMusic byLorne Balfe[1]CinematographyPatrick MurguiaProductioncompany Grindstone Entertainment Group Cheetah Vision Court Five Emmett/Furla Films Distributed byLionsgateRelease date July\u00a019,\u00a02013\u00a0(2013-07-19) (United Kingdom) August\u00a023,\u00a02013\u00a0(2013-08-23) (United States) Running time105 minutes[2]CountryUnited StatesLanguageEnglishBudget$19.2 million[3]Box office$5.6 million[3] The Frozen Ground is a 2013 American thriller crime drama film directed and written by Scott Walker in his directorial debut, and starring Nicolas Cage, John Cusack, Vanessa Hudgens, Katherine LaNasa, Radha Mitchell and 50 Cent. Based on the crimes of real-life Alaskan serial killer Robert Hansen,[4] the film depicts an Alaskan State Trooper seeking to apprehend Hansen by partnering with a young woman, who escaped from Hansen's clutches. The film was released in very few theaters and directly to video on demand on August 23, 2013, and has received mixed reviews though Cage's performance was cited as a highlight.[5][6] Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Production 4 Reception 5 References 6 External links Plot[edit] In an Anchorage motel room in 1983, 17-year-old Cindy Paulson (Vanessa Hudgens) is handcuffed and screaming for help. She is rescued by an Anchorage Police Department patrol officer. He takes Paulson to the hospital, and her clothes are kept for a rape kit. At an APD station, she explains to detectives that she was abducted and raped. Because she is a prostitute and lying about her age, the detectives do not believe her story, refusing to even look into the man whom she named as her abductor, Robert Hansen (John Cusack). They claim Hansen is an upstanding member of society, a family man who owns his own restaurant, and has alibis from three people. The APD patrol officer who rescued Paulson is outraged that the detectives refuse to pursue Hansen. He surreptitiously photocopies information about the case and sends it to the Alaska State Troopers. Meanwhile, state trooper Jack Halcombe (Nicolas Cage) has been called to investigate a female body that was found in the bush, half eaten by bears. The police connect the case to other missing girls, who have disappeared after going to what they thought were legitimate photo shoots. With secret information from the APD officer, Halcombe connects the other cases to Paulson's and starts to put together a portrait of Hansen. Paulson details how Hansen kept her captive, and that she escaped from his car when he tried to transfer her to his bush plane. Meanwhile, in Anchorage, Debbie Peters gets picked up by a man in an RV for a photo shoot. Later, Hansen eats a quiet dinner at home. His wife and children are away, and Hansen relaxes in his trophy room, casually ignoring Debbie who is chained to a post. She has urinated on the floor, and as she cleans up the mess with a towel, Hansen's neighbor enters the house to deliver a plate of food. Hansen warns Debbie not to scream and leaves the trophy room to greet his neighbor. Hansen then takes Debbie to the airport, where he orders her into his plane. After landing in a remote spot in the bush, Hansen frees Debbie, letting her run in a panic through the woods before he shoots her with a .223 caliber rifle. He steals her necklace before finishing her off with a handgun. Halcombe has a very difficult time assembling a case against Hansen. Because the evidence is circumstantial and Paulson is afraid to testify, the district attorney refuses to issue a search warrant. Paulson keeps falling back into the world of stripping and prostitution, despite Halcombe's efforts to keep her safe. At a strip club, while she is trying to sell lap dances, she notices Hansen trawling for a new victim. Their eyes meet, a chase ensues, and Paulson barely escapes. The encounter makes Hansen nervous, and he hires Carl Galenski to find and kill Paulson. Carl approaches Paulson's erstwhile pimp Clate Johnson (50 Cent) and offers to forgive his sizable debt if Clate turns Paulson over to him. Halcombe stakes out Hansen's house, causing Hansen to panic. Hansen gathers the evidence of his crimes, including the keepsakes from his victims, and flees with his son to the airport. He flies his plane to the bush and hides his keepsakes. Feeling that the chance to catch Hansen is slipping away, and with the victim count now at 17 girls, Halcombe forces the DA to issue a warrant. The search of Hansen's house yields no evidence, not even in his trophy room. Hansen agrees to be interrogated without a lawyer, but he is not yielding any new evidence. Halcombe arrests Hansen, but unless the police find new evidence, they will be unable to hold him. Halcombe orders a second search of Hansen's house, which turns up a hidden cache of guns, including the .223 caliber rifle used in many of the murders. Under police watch at a safe location, Paulson slips away and returns to her life of prostitution. Clate picks her up and delivers her to Carl. When Clate attempts to rob Carl, Paulson uses the opportunity to escape, with Carl in pursuit. After making a call to Halcombe, Paulson is almost killed by Carl, but Halcombe rescues her just in time. Halcombe uses a bracelet identical to one worn by one of the victims in order to trick Hansen into thinking the police have found where he hid the evidence in the bush. The bracelet, combined with the sight of Paulson in the interrogation room, enrages Hansen to the point that he incriminates himself. The epilogue states that Hansen confessed to the murder of 17 women and the kidnap and rape of another 30. He was charged with the abduction and rape of Cindy Paulson and the murders of Joanna Messina, Sherry Morrow, Paula Goulding and \"Eklutna Annie\". He was sentenced to 461 years plus life without parole. The film ends with a dedication and photographs of Hansen's victims. Cast[edit] Nicolas Cage \u2013 Jack Halcombe John Cusack \u2013 Robert Hansen Vanessa Hudgens \u2013 Cindy Paulson 50 Cent \u2013 Clate Johnson Radha Mitchell \u2013 Allie Halcombe Jodi Lyn O'Keefe \u2013 Chelle Ringell Dean Norris \u2013 Sgt. Lyle Haugsven Katherine LaNasa \u2013 Fran Hansen Matt Gerald \u2013 Ed Stauber Robert Forgit \u2013 Sgt. Wayne Von Clasen Ryan O'Nan \u2013 Gregg Baker Kurt Fuller \u2013 D.A. Pat Clives Kevin Dunn \u2013 Lt. Bob Jent Mark Smith \u2013 Head of Security Gia Mantegna \u2013 Debbie Peters Michael McGrady \u2013 Vice Det. John Gentile Brad William Henke \u2013 Carl Galenski Bostin Christopher \u2013 Al Taylor Tracy \u2013 Sandy Halcombe Ron Holmstrom \u2013 Attorney Mike Rule Jill Bess - Janet Production[edit] This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (August 2014) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) The film was shot in 26 days, entirely in Alaska. Writer/director Scott Walker delayed shooting for five months so he could shoot the film on the cusp of fall into winter, so he could achieve a look and feel of the film starting with no snow and ending in the deep of winter. He has said he literally wanted the feel of the weather closing in and around the story, and freezing the case. As a result of shooting at this time of year, by the end of 26 days' filming there were 3 1/2 hours less daylight per day than when filming began. Reception[edit] The movie has received mixed reviews from critics. On Rotten Tomatoes it has a 61% rating based on 54 reviews, with a weighted average of 5.2/10. The site's consensus reads: \"Though this by-the-numbers true procedural seems basic, The Frozen Ground presents a welcome return for Nicolas Cage in a solid performance.\"[5] Metacritic assigns the film an average score of 37 out of 100 based on 16 reviews from mainstream critics, indicating \"generally unfavorable reviews\".[6] References[edit] ^ \"Lorne Balfe to Score 'The Frozen Ground'\". Film Music Reporter. April 17, 2012. Retrieved August 29, 2015. ^ \"The Frozen Ground\". British Board of Film Classification. May 24, 2013. Retrieved May 27, 2013. ^ a b \"The Frozen Ground (2013)\". The Numbers. Retrieved August 29, 2015. ^ Dima Alzayat (October 20, 2011). \"On Location: 'The Frozen Ground' heats up filming in Alaska\". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved August 29, 2015. ^ a b \"The Frozen Ground\". Rotten Tomatoes. Flixster. Retrieved March 20, 2018. ^ a b \"The Frozen Ground\". Metacritic. CBS Interactive. Retrieved April 10, 2013. External links[edit] The Frozen Ground on IMDb The Frozen Ground at Rotten Tomatoes The Frozen Ground at Metacritic vte50 Cent Albums discography Singles discography Videography Awards and nominations G-Unit Studio albums Power of the Dollar Get Rich or Die Tryin' The Massacre Curtis Before I Self Destruct Animal Ambition Street King Immortal Compilations Guess Who's Back? 24 Shots Best Of Soundtracks Get Rich or Die Tryin' OST Mixtapes 50 Cent Is the Future No Mercy, No Fear God's Plan War Angel LP Forever King The Big 10 The Lost Tape 5 (Murder by Numbers) The Kanan Tape Concert tours The Invitation Tour Video games Bulletproof Blood on the Sand Television 50 Cent: The Money and the Power 50 Central Power Films Get Rich or Die Tryin' Home of the Brave Righteous Kill Before I Self Destruct Streets of Blood Dead Man Running Caught in the Crossfire 13 Gun Twelve Blood Out Setup All Things Fall Apart Freelancers Fire with Fire Escape Plan The Frozen Ground Vengeance The Prince Southpaw Relatedarticles Formula 50 Cheetah Vision SMS Audio Street King The 50th Law G-Unit Records G-Note Records G-Unit Books G-Unit Clothing Company G-Unit Films and Television Inc. G-Unity Foundation Inc. Shady/Aftermath The Re-Up Shady XV Jam Master Jay Eminem Dr. Dre Book Category Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Frozen_Ground&oldid=876228679\" Categories: 2013 filmsEnglish-language films2010s crime thriller films2010s serial killer films2010s thriller drama filmsAmerican crime thriller filmsAmerican filmsAmerican serial killer filmsAmerican thriller drama filmsCrime films based on actual eventsDirectorial debut filmsFilms set in 1983Films set in AlaskaFilms shot in AlaskaEmmett/Furla/Oasis Films filmsLions Gate Entertainment filmsFilms about rapeThriller films based on actual eventsFilms scored by Lorne BalfeHidden categories: Use mdy dates from October 2015Articles needing additional references from August 2014All articles needing additional references Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces ArticleTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version Languages \u0627\u0644\u0639\u0631\u0628\u064a\u0629DanskDeutschEspa\u00f1olEuskara\u0641\u0627\u0631\u0633\u06ccFran\u00e7ais\ud55c\uad6d\uc5b4Bahasa IndonesiaItalianoNederlands\u65e5\u672c\u8a9eNorskPolskiPortugu\u00eas\u0420\u0443\u0441\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439Simple English\u0423\u043a\u0440\u0430\u0457\u043d\u0441\u044c\u043a\u0430 Edit links This page was last edited on 1 January 2019, at 00:09\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "The Frozen Ground \u2013 review | Film | The Guardian Skip to main content The Guardian - Back to home Support The Guardian Available for everyone, funded by readers Contribute Subscribe Contribute Search jobs Sign in My account Comments & replies Public profile Account details Emails & marketing Membership Contributions Subscriptions Sign out Search switch to the US edition switch to the UK edition switch to the Australia edition switch to the International edition current edition: US edition News Opinion Sport Culture Lifestyle Show More News US news World news Environment Soccer US politics Business Tech Science Opinion The Guardian view Columnists Letters Opinion videos Cartoons Sport Soccer NFL Tennis MLB MLS NBA NHL Culture Film Books Music Art & design TV & radio Stage Classical Games Lifestyle Fashion Food Recipes Love & sex Home & garden Health & fitness Family Travel Money What term do you want to search? Search with google Make a contribution Subscribe US edition switch to the UK edition switch to the Australia edition switch to the International edition Search jobs Digital Archive Discount Codes The Guardian app Video Podcasts Pictures Newsletters Inside the Guardian Guardian Weekly Crosswords Facebook Twitter Search jobs Digital Archive Discount Codes Film Books Music Art & design TV & radio Stage Classical Games More Thrillers (film) The Frozen Ground \u2013 review 3 / 5 stars 3 out of 5 stars. Nicolas Cage, Vanessa Hudgens and John Cusack give solid performances in this Prime Suspect-like thriller Peter Bradshaw @PeterBradshaw1 Thu 18 Jul 2013 15.40\u00a0EDT First published on Thu 18 Jul 2013 15.40\u00a0EDT Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share via Email You know you're getting older when the policemen start looking younger, you have no idea what's at No 1 and John Cusack starts playing serial killers. To follow up his sweaty-sicko turn in The Paperboy, Cusack portrays Robert Hansen, a\u00a0mousy-looking family man in Alaska in 1983 who has a secret career in mass murder. On his trail is Sgt Jack Halcombe, played by Nicolas Cage with reasonable restraint and no sudden shouting, and Vanessa Hudgens is one of Hansen's targets who escaped and now faces the ordeal of testifying. There is some good Prime\u00a0Suspect-like tension here, with a neat cat-and-mouse psychological gamble with a certain piece of jewellery \u2013 and solid performances from Hudgens, Cage and Cusack. Topics Thrillers (film) John Cusack Nicolas Cage reviews Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share via Email Share on LinkedIn Share on Pinterest Share on WhatsApp Share on Messenger Reuse this content more on this story Nicolas Cage: 'People think I'm not in on the joke' The castles. The cars. The out-there acting. The 108-day marriage to Lisa Marie Presley. Nicolas Cage has a\u00a0reputation for\u00a0excess \u2013 but\u00a0we've got him all wrong, he\u00a0tells Emma Brockes Published: 20 Jul 2013 Nicolas Cage: 'People think I'm not in on the joke' The Frozen Ground - video review 4:00 Published: 19 Jul 2013 The Frozen Ground - video review John Cusack: from hearththrob to psychopath Published: 7 Jul 2013 John Cusack: from hearththrob to psychopath Most popular Film Books Music Art & design TV & radio Stage Classical Games About us Contact us Complaints & corrections Secure Drop Work for us Privacy policy Cookie policy \"\" Terms & conditions Help All topics All writers Digital newspaper archive Facebook Twitter Advertise with us Guardian Labs Search jobs Dating Discount Codes Support The\u00a0Guardian Available for everyone, funded by readers Contribute Subscribe Back to top \u00a9 2019 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. Close", "The Frozen Ground Movie Review (2013) | Roger Ebert In Memoriam 1942 \u2013 2013 \u201cRoger Ebert loved movies.\u201d RogerEbert.com Reviews Great Movies Chaz's Journal Blogs Far Flungers Channels Contributors 3 Faces A savvy rebel, Panahi continues to laugh in the face of that sentence and produce one fascinating cinematic oeuvre after another, manipulating and evolving the\u2026 Captain Marvel The girl power (and grrl power) ring out loud and clear, if a bit hollow. Other Reviews Gloria Bell An Elephant Sitting Still Black Mother Review Archives \u2716 Howards End Roger Ebert on James Ivory's \"Howards End\". Ballad of Narayama \"The Ballad of Narayama\" is a Japanese film of great beauty and elegant artifice, telling a story of startling cruelty. What a space it opens\u2026 Other Reviews Monsieur Hire Veronika Voss Spirit of the Beehive Great Movie Archives \u2716 Happy International Women\u2019s Day: Wild Geese Chaz's Journal | by Chaz Ebert A reprint of Mary Oliver's poem, \"Wild Geese\" in honor of International Women's Day. PBS' Four-Part Film Series, Women, War & Peace II Chaz's Journal | by Jana Monji The PBS documentary series returns with four stories about women involve in conflicts in Northern Ireland, Egypt, Gaza, Bangladesh and Haiti. Other Articles Netflix's Ricky Gervais Series After Life Doesn't Have Enough Reasons to Exist | Chaz's Journal Art, Love, and the Healing Ambiguities of Shirkers | Chaz's Journal Black Women vs. The End of the World (Again) | Chaz's Journal Chaz's Journal Archives \u2716 Happy International Women\u2019s Day: Wild Geese Chaz's Journal | by Chaz Ebert A reprint of Mary Oliver's poem, \"Wild Geese\" in honor of International Women's Day. PBS' Four-Part Film Series, Women, War & Peace II Chaz's Journal | by Jana Monji The PBS documentary series returns with four stories about women involve in conflicts in Northern Ireland, Egypt, Gaza, Bangladesh and Haiti. Other Articles Netflix's Ricky Gervais Series After Life Doesn't Have Enough Reasons to Exist | Chaz's Journal Art, Love, and the Healing Ambiguities of Shirkers | Chaz's Journal Black Women vs. The End of the World (Again) | Chaz's Journal Blog Archives \u2716 How The Poseidon Adventure Got Me Hooked On Movies for Life Far Flungers | by Gerardo Valero Far-Flung Correspondent Gerardo Valero reflects on one of his favorite movies, The Poseidon Adventure. The Lion in Winter Far Flungers | by Seongyong Cho A piece from a Far-Flung Correspondent on The Lion in Winter. Other Articles A Writer Watches Roma in Mexico City | Far Flungers AFI Fest 2018: I Am the Night | Far Flungers Return to Terror: Why the Election of Jair Bolsonaro Would be a Disaster for Brazil | Far Flungers Far Flunger Archives \u2716 Kathryn Bostic on Being the First African-American Female Composer to Join the Academy Interviews | by Chaz Ebert An interview with Kathryn Bostic, acclaimed composer of \"Dear White People\" and \"Toni Morrison: The Pieces I Am.\" Gaspar Noe on Climax, Accidental Allegories, Catastrophe Movies and More Interviews | by Andy Crump An interview with director Gaspar Noe about his provocative new film, Climax. Other Articles Kate Beckinsale Saves Amazon\u2019s Grief-Stricken Thriller Series The Widow | Demanders I Don\u2019t Want to See An Actor Onscreen: Franz Rogowski on Transit, Happy End, Victoria and More | Interviews Christian Petzold on Transit, Kafka, His Love for Den of Thieves and More | Interviews Channel Archives \u2716 Reviews The Frozen Ground The Frozen Ground (2013) Cast Nicolas Cage as Jack Halcombe Vanessa Anne Hudgens as Cindy Paulson John Cusack as Robert Hansen Dean Norris as Sgt. Lyle Haugsven Radha Mitchell as Allie Halcombe 50 Cent as Pimp Clate Johnson Director Scott Walker Writer Scott Walker Crime, Drama, Thriller Rated R 105 minutes | Sheila O'Malley August 25, 2013 | Print Page Tweet Anchorage, Alaska, circa 1983, looks and feels like a pioneer town in the Wild West in \"The Frozen Ground,\" Scott Walker's new crime thriller (and first feature). It's a town teeming with strip clubs, drug addiction, prostitution, and runaway girls whom nobody would miss if they went missing. And they do go missing, in droves. Based on the true story of Alaskan serial killer Robert Hansen (played here by John Cusack), and detective Glenn Flothe (named, in the film, Jack Holcombe, and played by Nicolas Cage) who, in investigating a series of missing persons reports as well as a couple of dead girls dug up by animals out in the wilderness, starts to wonder if all of these events aren't somehow connected. Advertisement \"The Frozen Ground\" trucks in cliche, as most serial killer and police procedural films do, but the strength of the acting (from the leads down to people with only one or two lines) helps ground the film. Filmed in a frenetic style, with gigantic moving frenzied closeups, and an almost total lack of establishing shots, \"The Frozen Ground\" is best when it lands, and stays, on the faces of the leads: Nicolas Cage, John Cusack, and Vanessa Hudgens. When we are looking at their faces, we don't need to be reminded of the stakes. They're there in plain view.It's hard to do something new in the serial killer genre, especially since the field is so over-saturated, from the 24/7 Investigation Discovery channel to \"Criminal Minds\"'s weekly obsession with how dangerous it is to be a woman because one minute you're walking down the street, minding your own business, the next minute you're chained up in a dungeon. All of those familiar elements are here. Jack Holcombe even has a resentful wife (Radha Mitchell), complaining to her husband about how hard he works, before doing an unmotivated about-face in a later scene. Why do movies so rarely know what to do with wives of workaholics? Why are they usually given the role of nag, before coming around in the final hour?\u00a0But \"The Frozen Ground\" is not trying to re-invent the wheel, and it also isn't trying to imitate \"Seven\" or \"Silence of the Lambs.\" It is interested in Holcombe's increasingly urgent investigation, and the pushback he receives from higher-ups who don't want to re-open what were considered to be closed cases. There's one shot of Nicolas Cage sitting in a dark office, staring up at a bulletin board, covered with snapshots of missing women. That one shot establishes so much: his feeling of urgency, the sense of how huge this thing could be if anyone could find the missing links, and the loneliness of his quest. Advertisement Robert Hansen's name may not be as well-known as Ted Bundy, or John Wayne Gacy, but his murderous spree in 1970s and 1980s Alaska puts him in the Serial Killer Pantheon. Despite a troubled and violent background with tons of red flags, Hansen was able to maneuver undetected in Anchorage for many years, abducting young women, raping them, taking them via private plane out into the inaccessible wilderness surrounding Anchorage and then hunting them like game. He was married, with kids. He worked as a baker. People liked him, but he was quiet and kept to himself. He had a great cover persona, as most of these characters do. Flothe finally got a warrant to search Hansen's house, and found an aviation map covered with X's, to mark the spot of his burial grounds. Many of the victims were never found. We'll never know the number of women he actually killed. Hansen was sentenced to 461 years in prison with no possibility of parole. Cindy Paulson (Vanessa Hudgens) is the teenage prostitute who managed to escape from Hansen's clutches, and went to the police to tell her story. She was not believed, because of her background. This is handled in a manner bordering on vaudeville, with one cop regaling a group of cops with the contemptuous comment, \"I mean, how can a prostitute be raped?\" They all laugh in agreement. This is not to say that such situations do not happen in police stations all the time, but the scene feels heavy-handed.The scenes between Nicolas Cage and Vanessa Hudgens are the film's best. Nicolas Cage is so grounded here, so real and simple. The whole film really hinges on Holcombe trying to make Cindy trust him so that she will testify and be a reliable witness, and this is where Cage shines. His entire performance is about two things only: thinking and listening. He has a power of listening that is totally authentic, and he is quite generous to his young co-star. He is not concerned with himself, because Jack Holcombe isn't either. He listens to Cindy talk on a level that could be described as subterranean, with a cop's instinct for what isn't being said. Advertisement And Cindy is, to put it mildly, a handful. She has a pimp (played by 50 Cent, who also is one of the producers of the film), but things have gone south in that relationship. She wanders up and down the \"Ho Stroll\" in Anchorage, and gets a job dancing in a strip club. She does coke and crystal meth. She has nowhere to live, and stands on the sidewalk in the driving snow. (There is a breathtaking scene that has nothing to do with anything else, where Cindy, alone on a deserted side street, comes across a gigantic moose, which has wandered into the city. Moose and Cindy stand for a while, staring at each other. The snow falls. It is a moment that is beyond meaning, beyond plot, reminiscent of the encounter with the deer on the railroad tracks at dawn in \"Stand By Me.\")John Cusack dials the burner down low, a smart choice, giving the character the guy-next-door persona which was so much a part of Hansen's successful M.O. When we see him in the flashbacks, with one of the girls he abducted (Gia Mantegna, in a gut-wrenching performance), he is calm, almost taciturn, even when he punches her in the head. He's almost kind and supportive with his victims, telling them they are \"good girls.\" Cusack has placed his voice at a very interesting part of his register, making him sound (and seem) benign. It's a voice that almost isn't there. He is a hunter, a predator. He has worked hard at his camouflage.Mixed in with the super fast hand-held action of the majority of the film are periodic aerial shots (Patrick Murguia is the cinematographer) of the forbidding Alaskan wilderness, mountains, glaciers, frozen rivers. These shots are constant reminders of what a vast field Hansen had to play in, and the impossibility of ever finding the missing. Popular Blog Posts Welcome to Women Writers Week 2019 Chaz Ebert & Nell Minow An introduction to Women Writers Week 2019. Who do you read? Good Roger, or Bad Roger? Roger Ebert This message came to me from a reader named Peter Svensland. He and a fr... Sexualized Innocence: Revisiting The Blue Lagoon Abbey Bender A look at how The Blue Lagoon both exploited and created the public persona of Brooke Shields, and how it plays 37 ye... Video Interview: Brie Larson, Lashana Lynch, Anna Boden and Ryan Fleck on Captain Marvel Katherine Tulich An exclusive video interview with the stars and co-directors of Captain Marvel, discussing female empowerment, friend... Popular Reviews Captain Marvel Leaving Neverland A Madea Family Funeral Alien: Covenant Reveal Comments Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus. comments powered by Disqus Advertisement Subscribe to our mailing list Enter Your Email Address Advertisement The Ebert Club is our hand-picked selection of content for Ebert fans. You will receive a weekly newsletter full of movie-related tidbits, articles, trailers, even the occasional streamable movie. Club members also get access to our members-only section on RogerEbert.com Premiere Member : $20.00USD - yearly Advertisement Reviews RSS Related Articles Pay the Ghost by Brian Tallerico In Theaters 3 Faces An Elephant Sitting Still Black Mother Captain Marvel Gloria Bell I'm Not Here Juanita The Kid Two Plains & a Fancy Leaving Neverland A Madea Family Funeral Apollo 11 Climax Giant Little Ones Greta Into the Dark: Treehouse Mapplethorpe Sharkwater: Extinction The Boy Who Harnessed the Wind The Hole in the Ground The Wedding Guest Transit We Die Young Woman at War How to Train Your Dragon: The Hidden World Paddleton Prosecuting Evil: The Extraordinary World of Ben Ferencz Run the Race The Changeover The Iron Orchard Alita: Battle Angel Birds of Passage Donnybrook Happy Death Day 2U Hotel by the River Isn't It Romantic Mega Time Squad Ruben Brandt, Collector Sorry Angel The Breaker Upperers The Wandering Earth Fighting with My Family Arctic Berlin, I Love You Cold Pursuit Everybody Knows High Flying Bird Lords of Chaos St. Agatha The Lego Movie 2: The Second Part The Man Who Killed Hitler and Then the Bigfoot The Prodigy To Dust Under the Eiffel Tower Untogether What Men Want Braid Daughter of Mine Into the Dark: Down Miss Bala Piercing Pig The Unicorn Then Came You Velvet Buzzsaw The Wild Pear Tree Breslin and Hamill: Deadline Artists King of Thieves Polar Serenity The Image Book The Invisibles The Kid Who Would Be King Movie Reviews Reviews Great Movies Blogs Roger Ebert's Journal Chaz's Journal MZS Channels Balder and Dash Demanders Far Flungers Thumbnails Interviews Festivals & Awards Sundance Life Itself Cannes Tributes to Roger Letters Opening Shots Project Empathy \u00a9 Copyright 2019, Ebert Digital LLC About the Site Contact Us Advertise with Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Movies by Letter Cast and Crew Like Us on Facebook Follow Us on Twitter RSS Feeds", "The Frozen Ground - Movie Reviews - Rotten Tomatoes Home Top Box Office Tickets & Showtimes DVD & Streaming TV News Join Newsletter \u00d7Close What is the Tomatometer\u00ae? The Tomatometer rating \u2013 based on the published opinions of hundreds of film and television critics \u2013 is a trusted measurement of movie and TV programming quality for millions of moviegoers. It represents the percentage of professional critic reviews that are positive for a given film or television show. From the Critics From RT Users Like You! Fresh The Tomatometer is 60% or higher. Rotten The Tomatometer is 59% or lower. Certified Fresh Movies and TV shows are Certified Fresh with a steady Tomatometer of 75% or higher after a set amount of reviews (80 for wide-release movies, 40 for limited-release movies, 20 for TV shows), including 5 reviews from Top Critics. Audience Score Percentage of users who rate a movie or TV show positively. Learn More What's the Tomatometer\u00ae? RT Critics Home Box Office TV DVD MORE News SIGN UP LOG IN Movies & DVDs Movies in Theaters Opening This Week Top Box Office Coming Soon to Theaters Weekend Earnings Certified Fresh Movies On Dvd & Streaming Netflix Streaming iTunes Amazon and Amazon Prime Fandango Now Top Rentals New Releases Coming Soon to DVD Certified Fresh Movies Browse All More Top Movies Trailers Forums Certified Fresh Picks TV View All View All More Top TV Shows Certified Fresh TV Certified Fresh Pick News Columns 24 Frames Binge Guide Box Office Guru Critics Consensus Five Favorite Films Now Streaming Parental Guidance Red Carpet Roundup RT on DVD The Simpsons Decade Sub-Cult Tech Talk Total Recall TV Countdown TV Talk Video Interviews Weekly Ketchup View All Best and Worst View All Guides View All RT News Tickets & Showtimes Trending on RT Sign Up For Our Newsletter Captain Marvel Reviews Cancelled/Renewed TV March TV Binge Guide The Frozen Ground R,1 hr. 45 min. Mystery & Suspense, Drama Directed By:\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 Scott Walker In Theaters:\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 Aug 23, 2013Wide On DVD:\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 Oct 1, 2013The Film Arcade The Frozen Ground 2 minutes30 seconds Added: Jun 14, 2013 View All Videos (1) The Frozen Ground Reviews All Critics Top Critics My Critics DVD Audience All Critics All Critics Top Critics My Critics DVD Audience Page 1 of 3 Chris Fennell CineVue February 25, 2019 A by-the-numbers addition to a well-worn genre that is destined to occupy the supermarket bargain bins sooner than perhaps expected. Full Review | Original Score: 2/5 Camilla Long Sunday Times (UK) March 8, 2018 There's not much between this and a Sunday-night drama, but the ice-bound setting is different and beautiful. Full Review | Original Score: 3/5 Dennis Schwartz Ozus' World Movie Reviews November 8, 2017 Watchable. Full Review | Original Score: B- Larushka Ivan-Zadeh Metro (UK) September 5, 2017 This is the kind of by-the-book, no-surprises, 'based on actual events' serial killer thriller you could write yourself. Full Review Bill Newcott AARP Movies for Grownups April 18, 2016 Cage hones his weary cop's character to a dull point, rough and ragged, like the lead of a detective's pencil scratching notes on a crumpled pad. Full Review | Original Score: 3 of 5 Jeffrey M. Anderson Common Sense Media September 18, 2014 As written and directed by Scott Walker, THE FROZEN GROUND isn't great, but it's surprisingly effective, thanks to its no-frills approach and its care with the actors and characters. Full Review | Original Score: 3/5 Jack Giroux Film School Rejects August 10, 2014 It's all around safe and plain, simple and to the point, and all very, very by-the-numbers. Full Review | Original Score: C Jason Best Movie Talk February 1, 2014 The Frozen Ground covers familiar territory but benefits from authentically seamy scene setting amid the bars and strip-joints where the killer found his prey, and from solid performances by its leads, all of whom are acting against type. Full Review Richard Haridy Quickflix December 10, 2013 The Frozen Ground is trying its best to act as a genuine tribute to the victims of a horrible crime. Unfortunately it falls short... Though still functioning as a solid genre piece, the chasm between intention and execution is embarrassingly apparent. Full Review | Original Score: 3/5 Forrest Hartman Reno Gazette-Journal October 1, 2013 The Frozen Ground isn't innovative, but it is a well-paced and engaging thriller that has the added appeal of a truth-based narrative. Full Review | Original Score: 3/4 MaryAnn Johanson Flick Filosopher September 30, 2013 In a rote cat-and-mouse cop-and-serial-killer story, Vanessa Hudgens' 'victim' is far more compelling than either cop Nicolas Cage or killer John Cusack. Full Review Paul Chambers Movie Chambers September 30, 2013 The scenes where Cage grills Cusack are the best thing about this very average thriller. Full Review | Original Score: C- Susan Granger SSG Syndicate September 2, 2013 Choppy and chilling, it's destined for a quick burial in the icy tundra. Full Review | Original Score: 5/10 Betty Jo Tucker ReelTalk Movie Reviews August 29, 2013 A chilling thriller with first-rate performances by John Cusack, Nicolas Cage and Vanessa Hudgens. Full Review Brian Orndorf Blu-ray.com August 28, 2013 Are we mourning the loss of these women or delighting in their downfall, relishing their abuse? Cheap thrills destroy whatever pure intentions launched Ground, chaining the effort to the most banal of B-movie pursuits. Full Review | Original Score: D+ Top Critic Sheila O'Malley RogerEbert.com August 27, 2013 \"The Frozen Ground\" trucks in cliche, as most serial killer and police procedural films do, but the strength of the acting (from the leads down to people with only one or two lines) helps ground the film. Full Review | Original Score: 3/4 Doris Toumarkine Film Journal International August 26, 2013 Impressive debut from New Zealand-born Scott Walker is told with style and panache. Strong performances, fevered pacing and immersive location lensing are big pluses pushing this from \"B\" pic to A-. Full Review Pete Hammond Movieline August 26, 2013 We've seen a lot of serial killer movies but this intriguing true story is well-acted and involving enough to be worth a shot. Full Review | Original Score: 3/5 Brent Simon Shared Darkness August 23, 2013 A true crime period piece that somewhat interestingly eschews a lot of investigatory grind in favor of moral certitude and throwback, cat-and-mouse tension. Full Review | Original Score: C+ Annlee Ellingson Paste Magazine August 23, 2013 Unfortunately, with a confusing script pocked with plot holes, The Frozen Ground misses an opportunity to create a lasting testament to their memories. Full Review | Original Score: 5.8/10 Page 1 of 3 Help About Rotten Tomatoes What's the Tomatometer? Critic Submission Licensing Advertise Careers Follow Us Copyright \u00a9 2018 Fandango. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy | Terms and Policies | Ad Choices Copyright \u00a9 2018 Fandango. All rights reserved. Terms and Policies\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 Privacy Policy", "The Frozen Ground (2013) Review | Movie Upcoming Horror Movies & Latest Horror Movie News Search Toggle navigation Movies Horror Movies Best Horror Movies List of Horror Movies 2019 Horror Movies 2018 Horror Movies Trailers Reviews Full Movie List New Movies New Horror Movies Blu-ray / DVD Release Dates Netflix New Releases New Movies On Demand Movie Genres TV Horror Anime List Horror Anthology Movies List Asian Horror Movies List Demon Movies List Horror Movies for Kids List Monster/Creature Movies List Serial Killer Movies Vampire Movies List Werewolf Movies List Zombie Movies List List of Horror Movies List of Sci-fi Movies List of Fantasy Movies List of Thriller Movies Demons Demon Names Female Demon Names Male Demon Names Fallen Angel Names Types of Demons Best Demon Movies Serial Killers Serial Killers List Female Serial Killers Famous Serial Killers American Serial Killers Best Serial Killer Movies Angels Vampires Werewolves Features Top 10s Featured News Top Picks \u00bb Upcoming New Horror Movies\u00bb 2018 Horror Movie Reviews\u00bb 2017 Horror Movie Reviews\u00bb 2019 Movie Trailers\u00bb 2018 Movie Trailers HellHorror Movies Movie Reviews The Frozen Ground (2013) Movie Review The Frozen Ground (2013) 2013\t| R | Thriller, Drama, Mystery, Crime, Biography, History105 minutes / 1h 45min 6/10 2.81/10 from 50,607 votes Vote Now! [ Movie Page: The Frozen Ground (2013) ][ Trailer ][ Full Poster ] The Frozen Ground Plot Synopsis:Alaska Trooper Jack Holcombe believes Robert Hansen is a serial killer who abducts young girls, tortures and sexually assaults them, then kills them. But Holcombe doesn't have enough evidence to get a search warrant for Hansen's premises. Holcombe knows that one victim, Cyndy Paulsen, somehow survived, so he decides to seek her help, but he finds that she's now a junkie with trust issues. Holcombe has to earn her trust; meanwhile, Hansen is still hunting and killing girls. The Frozen Ground (2013) Review The Frozen Ground is written and directed by Scott Walker (Ordan\u2019s Forest). This is the second movie that Scott directed and he did a phenomenal job executing it. The Frozen Ground is based on a true story about a search for Alaskan serial killer Robert Hansen in the 1980\u2019s. Nicolas Cage (The Croods, Stolen, Ghost Rider: Spirit of Vengeance)\u00a0played Jack Halcombe and did an awesome job at it. I love almost all Cage movies and this is on my list to watch again. Jack is an Alaskan State Trooper who is determined to catch a serial killer who stalks, kidnaps, sexually assaults and murders women in Anchorage. Jack and his police force had to abide by the law to catch this murderer because they needed to provide the court with evidence that will sustain. Vanessa Hudgens (Gimme Shelter, Machete Kills, Spring Breakers) also did a great job with her script as Cindy Paulson. Cindy is a victim who escaped the serial killer Robert Hansen (John Cusack - Lee Daniels\u2019 The Butler, Adult World, The Numbers Station) and was conducive in identifying him in court. Robert is a married man with children and does not seem like a killer at all. Cindy on the other hand is a prostitute who claims that Robert, who is also known as Bob, kidnapped her and tied her up. No one believes her except Jack and Jack tries to gain her trust so she can help him convict Bob but Cindy is scared for her life and tries to leave Alaska. There is female nude scenes, and several use of bad language. The movie is a sad movie to watch but it is very interesting and captivating. The Frozen Ground contains great scenery\u2019s, sets and it was spectacular to my eyes to see the outdoor scenes. It was a great bonus for me to see the Alaska moose (you will have to look to see when Cindy sees it). The end credits made me so sad to see some of his known victims. The movie overall touched me in so many ways. I feel it teaches so many important messages in life and although it might be disturbing to some viewers, I think people should give this movie a chance because of what it teaches. The Frozen Ground Rating ScoresOur Score: 6Overall Score: 5.61IMDB: 6.4MetaCritic: 3.7Rotten Tomatoes: 6.1 Search Movies By Title:#ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZSearch Movies By Year:2020201920182017Horror Movie Sub-Genres:VampiresDemonsMonstersSerial KillersAsianWerewolvesZombiesKidsAnthologiesDollScaryFound FootageParanormalSupernaturalAlienLovecraftCultB Horror About The Frozen Ground 2013 Title: The Frozen Ground Year: 2013 Runtime: 105 minutesType: MovieGenre: Thriller, Drama, Mystery, Crime, Biography, History Reviewer: Florita A. Score: 3 / 5 stars Published: January 9, 2014, 6:55 am Avg. Rating: 2.81/5 stars from 50,607 users. Total Avg. Votes: 50,607 MPAA Rating: R The Frozen Ground Cast Starring: Nicolas Cage, Dean Norris, Kevin Dunn, Radha Mitchell, John Cusack, Kurt Fuller, Mark Rhino Smith, Brad William Henke, Christopher Murray, Jason Collins, Tim Lacatena, Vanessa Hudgens, Craig Blair, Michael McGrady, Ryan O'Nan, Brett Baker, Jodi Lyn O'Keefe, Lydia Hull, Bostin Christopher, Erin Lindsay King, Olga Valentina, Joshua Ball, Gloria King, Kiki Warren, Cassandre Leigh, Teresa Koop, Jekka Rodriguez, Bryant Mainord, Jonathan Minton, Taylor Ann TracyThe Frozen Ground Writers: NAThe Frozen Ground Director: Scott WalkerBox Office: $89,515 Production: The Film Arcade Website: https://www.facebook.com/TheFrozenGroundMovie Language: English, French Country: USA \u00ab Previous Next \u00bb Search By Title:#ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZSearch Movies By Year:2020201920182017Horror Movie Sub-Genres:VampiresDemonsMonstersSerial KillersAsianWerewolvesZombiesKidsAnthologiesDollScaryFound FootageParanormalSupernaturalAlienLovecraftCultB Horror Top Trending Best Horror Anime - Anime Horror ListTop 25 Best Zombie MoviesTop 25 Best Demon MoviesTop 25 Best Vampire MoviesTop 25 Best Werewolf MoviesTop 15 Horror Movies Based on Real LifeTop Haunted Dolls in the WorldEd and Lorraine Warren Occult MuseumEverything About Shadow People You Need to KnowBest Nightmare on Elm Street Top ListBest Horror Movie QuotesBest Stephen King MoviesTop 7 Most Haunted Highways in the USBest Serial Killer MoviesScary Clown MoviesTop 5 Creepiest Paranormal GamesTop 10 Best HP Lovecraft MoviesTop Haunted Hotels in the USTop Haunted Asylums in AmericaEd and Lorraine Warren CasesFemale Serial KillersHorror Movies Based on True StoriesGruss Vom Krampus - The Christmas Demon Our Picks 2017 Trailers2017 Horror Movie ReviewsBlu-ray / DVD Release DatesNews Top PicksNetflix New Releases ListNew Movies On Demand ListMovie DirectorsMovie Actors / Movie Stars \u00a9 HellHorror LLC 2002-20190.0603 Contact Us | Sitemap By using this website you consent to the use of cookies in accordance with our Privacy Policy | Terms of Service", "The Frozen Ground, review - Telegraph Accessibility links Skip to article Skip to navigation Telegraph.co.uk Friday 08 March 2019 Home Video News World Sport Business Money Comment Culture Travel Life Women Fashion Luxury Tech Film Film TV and Radio Books Music Comedy Art Theatre Photography Dance Opera Hay Festival Glyndebourne Advertisement Home\u00bb Culture\u00bb Film\u00bb Film Reviews The Frozen Ground, review The Frozen Ground, a police procedural starring Nicolas Cage and John Cusack, is fist-gnawingly frustrating, says Tim Robey. 1 Nicolas Cage and Vanessa Hudgens in The Frozen Ground By Tim Robey 11:55AM BST 18 Jul 2013 Follow Dir: Scott Walker Stars: Nicolas Cage, John Cusack, Vanessa Hudgens, Curtis Jackson 15 cert, 105 min David Fincher\u2019s epic of loose ends, Zodiac (2007), might be the exception that proves the rule, but serial killer procedurals tend to gain nothing in intensity or moral sobriety simply by being \u201cbased on real events\u201d. For proof, you only need turn to The Frozen Ground. Might we call this dubious entertainment? Hardly: it\u2019s not even entertaining. Adapting the notorious case of a prolific sexual predator in Alaska called Robert Hansen (played by John Cusack), the movie recounts the state\u2019s faltering efforts to bring him to justice, which it structures so confusingly and badly it occasionally feels as though the Keystone Kops are running amok inside the lurid crime-thriller universe of James (Kiss the Girls) Patterson. Related Articles The wonderfully mad world of Nicolas Cage 03 Jul 2013 The World\u2019s End, review 09 Jul 2013 Play 11 Jul 2013 It starts with a small-time prostitute, Cindy Paulson (Vanessa Hudgens) narrowly escaping Hansen\u2019s clutches. Though she\u2019s meant to have become the clinching witness against him, the bulk of the film is spent with the authorities ignoring and discrediting her story with no other leads to go on \u2014 a situation which, though presumably faithful to the facts, is fist-gnawingly frustrating in terms of dramatic development. Only Nicolas Cage, as a dogged State Trooper called Jack Halcombe, successfully connects the dots and tries to bring Cindy into the investigation, also offering her his spare room while she recovers from the ordeal. Fans of Cage and Cusack, previously paired as unlikely allies in Con Air (1997), may be looking forward to a bit of deranged actorly combat once Hansen is cornered in the interrogation room, but it\u2019s here that this hopeless flick comes up especially short. Cage is on his dourest sorrows-of-the-world autopilot, and Cusack, who seems to have less and less to offer us at all these days, serves up a listless banality-of-evil cipher instead of a character. Beyond them, debut director Scott Walker is guilty of giving Radha Mitchell the most thankless role of her career as Cage\u2019s vaguely disgruntled wife, while rendering Curtis \u201c50 Cent\u201d Jackson even more than usually ridiculous by wigging him up, as Cindy\u2019s pimp, perhaps in homage to the shoulder-length hair of mid-1990s Angela Bassett. One person alone survives unscathed, and that\u2019s Hudgens, transparently but boldly gunning for serious actor kudos with the sort of endangered hooker role handed to Jane Fonda on a plate in Klute. You won\u2019t walk away from this film predicting an Oscar, exactly, but she\u2019s tough and committed in ways that often come to the rescue. Her solid contribution makes it all the more scandalous that Walker\u2019s camera insists on prowling around strip-bars when it\u2019s not even meant to be adopting Hansen\u2019s point of view, as if the great advantage of choosing misogynistic murder as your subject was its opportunity for a few topless peep-shows along the way. Follow @TelegraphFilm Start your free 30 day Amazon Prime trial\u00bb Film Reviews Culture \u00bb Tim Robey \u00bb Culture News \u00bb Culture Reviews \u00bb Film \u00bb In Film Reviews The best movies to watch Box office hits in 2014 Michael Keaton: 'Who are you calling a washed-up superhero?' The 80 best films on Netflix The best films in cinemas now Read more film reviews Advertisement Advertisement Film Galleries Clint Eastwood: 60 years in film 30 great closing lines in films Robin Williams: 50 great quotes Jennifer Lawrence in pictures The 49 best British films of all time Who gained or lost weight for films? Culture Video\u00bb Oscars 2016 highlights Chris Rock's funniest Oscars jokes Come Dine with Me producer wins Oscar Leo attends the Oscars after-party Lady Gaga sings with sexual abuse survivors Oscars 2016: Red carpet highlights More from the web Advertisement Advertisement More from the web LISTS AND QUOTES 80 great quotes about love and romance Books In Pictures - the story of love and romance: from Adam and Eve to Tinder and Chemsex. Compiled by Martin Chilton Great quotes about acting Film 50 great quotes about acting Who are the 50 best TV cops of all time? TV We countdown the best TV detectives and sleuths, from Maigret and McNulty to Scooby-Doo 30 great opening lines in literature 30 great one-liners More from the web World News The latest world news View US News Latest and breaking stories from the United States View Film All the latest film trailers, reviews and features View Football Catch up on all the latest football news and results View Back to top HOME Film Film Reviews Film News Books Book Reviews Book Shop Music Music Reviews Classical Music Music Video Music Festivals Opera Tickets TV and Radio TV Guide Theatre Theatre Reviews Art Dance Dating Culture News Picture Galleries Culture Video Culture Critics Photography Crossword Theatre Tickets Contact us Privacy and Cookies Advertising Fantasy Football Announcements Reader Prints Follow Us Apps Epaper Expat Promotions Subscriber Syndication \u00a9 Copyright of Telegraph Media Group Limited 2019 Terms and Conditions Today's News Archive Style Book Weather Forecast", "The Frozen Ground (2013) - IMDb IMDb More All Titles TV Episodes Names Companies Keywords Movies, TV & Showtimes Finding Nemo (2003) #168 on IMDb Top Rated Movies \u00bb WATCH NOW IMDb Freedive MOVIES In Theaters Showtimes & Tickets Latest Trailers Coming Soon Release Calendar Top Rated Movies Top Rated Indian Movies Most Popular Movies Box Office Most Popular by Genre TV & VIDEO IMDb TV Top Rated TV Shows Most Popular TV Shows DVD & Blu-Ray SPECIAL FEATURES Amazon Originals Streaming Now Horror Guide IMDb Picks Best of 2018 Video Games Marvel Celebs, Events & Photos Matthew McConaughey \u00bb #125 on STARmeter CELEBS Born Today Celebrity News Most Popular Celebs PHOTOS Latest Stills Latest Posters Photos We Love EVENTS Awards Central Festival Central Oscars Golden Globes Sundance Cannes San Diego Comic-Con Emmy Awards Venice Film Festival Toronto Film Festival Tribeca LA Film Festival All Events News & Community LATEST HEADLINES Box Office: \u2018Captain Marvel\u2019 Soars to $20.7 Million on Thursday 08 March 2019 | Variety \"Airwolf\" Star Jan-Michael Vincent Dead at 74 08 March 2019 | TMZ Julie Andrews to Receive Lifetime Achievement Award at Venice Film Festival 08 March 2019 | Variety NEWS Top News Movie News TV News Celebrity News Indie News COMMUNITY Contributor Zone Polls Watchlist YOUR WATCHLIST The essential resource for entertainment professionals Find industry contacts & talent representation Access in-development titles not available on IMDb Get the latest news from leading industry trades Claim your page and control your brand across IMDb & Amazon TryIMDbProFree Try IMDbPro Free | Help | Sign in FULL CAST AND CREW | TRIVIA | USER REVIEWS | IMDbPro | MORE LESS 0Check in X I'm Watching This! Keep track of everything you watch; tell your friends. Error Please try again! Added to Your Check-Ins. View Check in DETAILS Full Cast and Crew Release Dates Official Sites Company Credits Filming & Production Technical Specs STORYLINE Taglines Plot Summary Synopsis Plot Keywords Parents Guide RELATED ITEMS News External Sites OPINION Awards FAQ User Reviews User Ratings External Reviews Metacritic Reviews PHOTO & VIDEO Photo Gallery Trailers and Videos DID YOU KNOW? Trivia Goofs Crazy Credits Quotes Alternate Versions Connections Soundtracks 6.4/10 51,354 151 user 128 critic Rate This The Frozen Ground\u00a0(2013) R | 1h 45min | Crime, Drama, Mystery | 11 July 2013 (Netherlands) 1:30 | Trailer 2 VIDEOS | 33 IMAGES Watch Now From $3.99 (HD) on Prime Video An Alaska State Trooper partners with a young woman who escaped the clutches of serial killer Robert Hansen to bring the murderer to justice. Based on actual events. Director: Scott Walker Writer: Scott Walker Stars: Nicolas Cage, Vanessa Hudgens, John Cusack | See full cast & crew\u00a0\u00bb 37 Metascore From metacritic.com Reviews 151 user | 128 critic Popularity 3,877 ( 1,217) View production, box office, & company info \"The Orville\" Star Jessica Szohr Has Tarantino Dreams Jessica Szohr reveals the director she's dying to work with, and the movie you have to love to be her friend. Watch now Related News The Complete Works Ep. 65: Nicolas Cage \u2013 The Frozen Ground (2013) 13 December 2018 | Film-Book Hulu schedule: Here\u2019s what is coming and leaving in August 2018 31 July 2018 | Gold Derby MoviePass Parent Company Acquiring Emmett Furla Oasis Films (Exclusive) 30 May 2018 | Variety See all related articles\u00a0\u00bb Around The Web \u00a0| Powered by ZergNet Create a list\u00a0\u00bb User Lists Related lists from IMDb users Favoriten - Mystery a list of 36 titles created 2\u00a0weeks\u00a0ago Nicholas Cage a list of 27 titles created 1\u00a0week\u00a0ago Filmes que o Gigio quer assistir no Netflix a list of 39 titles created 9\u00a0months\u00a0ago Sehen a list of 34 titles created 21\u00a0Jan\u00a02012 2013 Media Duds a list of 48 titles created 9\u00a0months\u00a0ago See all related lists\u00a0\u00bb Related Items Search for \"The Frozen Ground\" on Amazon.com Share this Rating Title: The Frozen Ground (2013) 6.4/10 Want to share IMDb's rating on your own site? Use the HTML below. You must be a registered user to use the IMDb rating plugin. Login Show HTML View more styles User Polls Best Nicolas Cage Movie Best Depiction of the 1980s in Recent Film Best Debut Film of 2013? See more polls \u00bb 1 nomination. See more awards\u00a0\u00bb Videos See all 2 videos \u00bb Photos See all 33 photos\u00a0\u00bb Edit Cast Cast overview, first billed only: Nicolas Cage ... Sgt. Jack Halcombe Vanessa Hudgens ... Cindy Paulson John Cusack ... Robert Hansen Dean Norris ... Sgt. Lyle Haugsven Gia Mantegna ... Debbie Peters Robert Forgit ... Sgt. Wayne Von Clasen Brad William Henke ... Carl Galenski Michael McGrady ... Vice Det. John Gentile Katherine LaNasa ... Fran Hansen Ryan O'Nan ... Officer Gregg Baker Kevin Dunn ... Lt. Bob Jent Connor Rockom ... Hansen Son Radha Mitchell ... Allie Halcombe Matt Gerald ... Asst. Sgt. Ed Stauber Jodi Lyn O'Keefe ... Chelle Ringell See full cast\u00a0\u00bb View production, box office, & company info Edit Storyline Alaska Trooper Jack Holcombe believes Robert Hansen is a serial killer who abducts young girls, tortures and sexually assaults them, then kills them. But Holcombe doesn't have enough evidence to get a search warrant for Hansen's premises. Holcombe knows that one victim, Cyndy Paulsen, somehow survived, so he decides to seek her help, but he finds that she's now a junkie with trust issues. Holcombe has to earn her trust; meanwhile, Hansen is still hunting and killing girls. Written by rcs0411@yahoo.com Plot Summary | Plot Synopsis Plot Keywords: based on true story | serial killer | strip club | anchorage alaska | pole dancer |\u00a0See All (158)\u00a0\u00bb Taglines: The hunter becomes the hunted See more\u00a0\u00bb Genres: Crime\u00a0| Drama\u00a0| Mystery\u00a0| Thriller Motion Picture Rating (MPAA) Rated R for violent content, sexuality/nudity, language and drug use | See all certifications\u00a0\u00bb Parents Guide: View content advisory\u00a0\u00bb Edit Details Official Sites: Official site [Japan] Country: USA Language: English | French Release Date: 11 July 2013 (Netherlands) See more\u00a0\u00bb Also Known As: Frozen Ground See more\u00a0\u00bb Filming Locations: Alaska, USA See more\u00a0\u00bb Edit Box Office Budget:$27,220,000 (estimated) See more on IMDbPro\u00a0\u00bb Company Credits Production Co: Grindstone Entertainment Group, Emmett/Furla/Oasis Films (EFO Films), Cheetah Vision See more\u00a0\u00bb Show more on IMDbPro\u00a0\u00bb Technical Specs Runtime: 105 min Sound Mix: SDDS | DTS | Dolby Digital Color: Color Aspect Ratio: 2.35 : 1 See full technical specs\u00a0\u00bb Edit Did You Know? Trivia The film was shot in 26 days. By the end of filming, the days had 3-1/2 fewer hours of daylight. See more \u00bb Goofs After Robert picks up Debbie Peters for a photo shoot, a 2005 Ford truck drives toward the camera. See more \u00bb Quotes Robert Hansen: You little cunt! You think you can threaten me with this little whore? I should have killed you when I had the chance! See more \u00bb Crazy Credits The end credits begin with pictures and information about Hansen's known victims See more \u00bb Connections Featured in Projector: The Frozen Ground\u00a0(2013) See more \u00bb Soundtracks Waking All The Demons Written by Stuart Hart Published by Seven Mile Lane Music (ASCAP) \u00a9 2008 Selectracks, Inc. See more \u00bb Frequently Asked Questions This FAQ is empty. Add the first question. User Reviews Decent movie that only scratches the surface of Hansen's diabolical crime spree 2 October 2013 | by fredngraham \u2013 See all my reviews This is a decent movie, which ironically would best be viewed on the big screen given the visually arresting shots of the Alaskan landscape except that it had a very tiny release on the big screen, and has most certainly been seen more on-demand and now through the DVD format. In case a viewer of \"The Frozen Ground\" is left unsatisfied with the necessary compression of events, composite characters, etc. that are necessary to produce a movie of less than two hours in length, and want to learn more about the Hansen case that inspired the movie one could do worse then read \"Fair Game\" (http://tinyurl.com/mqssp5z) by Bernard DuClos that was recently republished. Reading it as a companion to themovie will help the viewer of \"The Frozen Ground\" realize the liberties that were inevitably taken to make it suitable for the silver screen as well as understand elements of Hansen's life and killing spree that the picture did not have time to delve into such as more of Hansen's background (which early on indicated a propensity toward crime) and the back story of the whole oil pipeline boom that produced the mafia controlled prostitution/strip bar scene that Hudgen's character is entangled in. 50 of 57 people found this review helpful. Was this review helpful to you? Yes No | Report this Review this title | See all 151 user reviews\u00a0\u00bb Getting Started | Contributor Zone\u00a0\u00bb Contribute to This Page Edit page IMDb Freedive: Watch Movies and TV Series for Free Watch Hollywood hits and TV favorites for free with IMDb Freedive. Start streaming on IMDb and Fire TV devices today! Start watching Rent or Buy Popular Movies With Prime Video Explore popular movies available to rent or buy on Prime Video. Visit Prime Video to explore more titles Clear your history Recently Viewed IMDb Everywhere Find showtimes, watch trailers, browse photos, track your Watchlist and rate your favorite movies and TV shows on your phone or tablet! IMDb Mobile site Follow IMDb on Home Top Rated Movies Box Office TV Coming Soon Site Index Search In Theaters Contact Us Register News Press Room Advertising Jobs IMDbPro Box Office Mojo Withoutabox Conditions of Use Privacy Policy Interest-Based Ads Copyright \u00a9 1990-2019 IMDb.com, Inc. Amazon Affiliates Prime Video Unlimited Streamingof Movies & TV Amazon UK Buy Movies onDVD & Blu-ray Amazon Germany Buy Movies onDVD & Blu-ray Amazon Italy Buy Movies onDVD & Blu-ray Amazon France Buy Movies onDVD & Blu-ray Amazon India Buy Movie andTV Show DVDs DPReview DigitalPhotography Audible DownloadAudio Books", "An Error Occurred Setting Your User Cookie An Error Occurred Setting Your User Cookie This site uses cookies to improve performance. If your browser does not accept cookies, you cannot view this site. Setting Your Browser to Accept Cookies There are many reasons why a cookie could not be set correctly. Below are the most common reasons: You have cookies disabled in your browser. You need to reset your browser to accept cookies or to ask you if you want to accept cookies. Your browser asks you whether you want to accept cookies and you declined. To accept cookies from this site, use the Back button and accept the cookie. Your browser does not support cookies. Try a different browser if you suspect this. The date on your computer is in the past. If your computer's clock shows a date before 1 Jan 1970, the browser will automatically forget the cookie. To fix this, set the correct time and date on your computer. You have installed an application that monitors or blocks cookies from being set. You must disable the application while logging in or check with your system administrator. Why Does this Site Require Cookies? This site uses cookies to improve performance by remembering that you are logged in when you go from page to page. To provide access without cookies would require the site to create a new session for every page you visit, which slows the system down to an unacceptable level. What Gets Stored in a Cookie? This site stores nothing other than an automatically generated session ID in the cookie; no other information is captured. In general, only the information that you provide, or the choices you make while visiting a web site, can be stored in a cookie. For example, the site cannot determine your email name unless you choose to type it. Allowing a website to create a cookie does not give that or any other site access to the rest of your computer, and only the site that created the cookie can read it.", "An Error Occurred Setting Your User Cookie An Error Occurred Setting Your User Cookie This site uses cookies to improve performance. If your browser does not accept cookies, you cannot view this site. Setting Your Browser to Accept Cookies There are many reasons why a cookie could not be set correctly. Below are the most common reasons: You have cookies disabled in your browser. You need to reset your browser to accept cookies or to ask you if you want to accept cookies. Your browser asks you whether you want to accept cookies and you declined. To accept cookies from this site, use the Back button and accept the cookie. Your browser does not support cookies. Try a different browser if you suspect this. The date on your computer is in the past. If your computer's clock shows a date before 1 Jan 1970, the browser will automatically forget the cookie. To fix this, set the correct time and date on your computer. You have installed an application that monitors or blocks cookies from being set. You must disable the application while logging in or check with your system administrator. Why Does this Site Require Cookies? This site uses cookies to improve performance by remembering that you are logged in when you go from page to page. To provide access without cookies would require the site to create a new session for every page you visit, which slows the system down to an unacceptable level. What Gets Stored in a Cookie? This site stores nothing other than an automatically generated session ID in the cookie; no other information is captured. In general, only the information that you provide, or the choices you make while visiting a web site, can be stored in a cookie. For example, the site cannot determine your email name unless you choose to type it. Allowing a website to create a cookie does not give that or any other site access to the rest of your computer, and only the site that created the cookie can read it.", "Amazon.com: Cryosols (9783540207511): John Kimble: Books", "Publications - CryoSol World HomeVitroJetNewsEventsPublicationsAboutContact Select Page PublicationsRelevant publicationsAlvarez, F. J., He, S., Perilla, J. R., Jang, S., Schulten, K., Engelman, A. N., ... & Zhang, P. (2017). CryoEM structure of MxB reveals a novel oligomerization interface critical for HIV restriction.\u00a0Science Advances,\u00a03(9), e1701264.Human dynamin-like, interferon-induced myxovirus resistance 2 (Mx2 or MxB) is a potent HIV-1 inhibitor. Antiviral activity requires both the amino-terminal region of MxB and protein oligomerization, each of which has eluded structural determination due to difficulties in protein preparation. We report that maltose binding protein-fused, full-length wild-type MxB purifies as oligomers and further self-assembles into helical arrays in physiological salt. Guanosine triphosphate (GTP), but not guanosine diphosphate, binding results in array disassembly, whereas subsequent GTP hydrolysis allows its reformation. Using cryo-electron microscopy (cryoEM), we determined the MxB assembly structure at 4.6 \u00c5 resolution, representing the first near-atomic resolution structure in the mammalian dynamin superfamily. The structure revealed previously described and novel MxB assembly interfaces. Mutational analyses demonstrated a critical role for one of the novel interfaces in HIV-1 restriction.Cheng, Y. (2018). Single-particle cryo-EM\u2014How did it get here and where will it go. Science, 361(6405), 876-880.Cryo\u2013electron microscopy, or simply cryo-EM, refers mainly to three very different yet closely related techniques: electron crystallography, single-particle cryo-EM, and electron cryotomography. In the past few years, single-particle cryo-EM in particular has triggered a revolution in structural biology and has become a newly dominant discipline. This Review examines the fascinating story of its start and evolution over the past 40-plus years, delves into how and why the recent technological advances have been so groundbreaking, and briefly considers where the technique may be headed in the future.D'Imprima, E., D. Floris, M. Joppe, R. S\u00e1nchez, M. Grininger and W. K\u00fchlbrandt (2018). \"The deadly touch: protein denaturation at the water-air interface and how to prevent it.\" bioRxiv: 400432.Electron cryo-microscopy analyzes the structure of proteins and protein complexes in vitrified solution. Proteins tend to adsorb to the air-water interface in unsupported films of aqueous solution, which can result in partial or complete denaturation of the protein. We investigated the structure of yeast fatty acid synthase at the air-water interface by electron cryo-tomography and single-particle image processing. Around 90% of complexes adsorbed to the air-water interface are partly denatured. We show that the unfolded regions are those facing the air-water interface. Denaturation by contact with air may happen at any stage of specimen preparation. Denaturation at the air-water interface is completely avoided when the complex is plunge-frozen on a substrate of hydrophilized graphene.Drulyte, I., Johnson, R. M., Hesketh, E. L., Hurdiss, D. L., Scarff, C. A., Porav, S. A., ... & Thompson, R. F. (2018). Approaches to altering particle distributions in cryo-electron microscopy sample preparation. Acta Crystallographica Section D: Structural Biology, 74(6).Cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) can now be used to determine high-resolution structural information on a diverse range of biological specimens. Recent advances have been driven primarily by developments in microscopes and detectors, and through advances in image-processing software. However, for many single-particle cryo-EM projects, major bottlenecks currently remain at the sample-preparation stage; obtaining cryo-EM grids of sufficient quality for high-resolution single-particle analysis can require the careful optimization of many variables. Common hurdles to overcome include problems associated with the sample itself (buffer components, labile complexes), sample distribution (obtaining the correct concentration, affinity for the support film), preferred orientation, and poor reproducibility of the grid-making process within and between batches. This review outlines a number of methodologies used within the electron-microscopy community to address these challenges, providing a range of approaches which may aid in obtaining optimal grids for high-resolution data collection.von der Ecken, J., Heissler, S. M., Pathan-Chhatbar, S., Manstein, D. J., & Raunser, S. (2016). Cryo-EM structure of a human cytoplasmic actomyosin complex at near-atomic resolution. Nature, 534(7609), 724.The interaction of myosin with actin filaments is the central feature of muscle contraction\u00a0and cargo movement along actin filaments of the cytoskeleton. The energy for these movements is generated during a complex mechanochemical reaction cycle. Crystal structures of myosin in different states have provided important structural insights into the myosin motor cycle when myosin is detached from F-actin. The difficulty of obtaining diffracting crystals, however, has prevented structure determination by crystallography of actomyosin complexes. Thus, although structural models exist of F-actin in complex with various myosins, a high-resolution structure of the F-actin\u2013myosin complex is missing. Here, using electron cryomicroscopy, we present the structure of a human rigor actomyosin complex at an average resolution of 3.9\u2009\u00c5. The structure reveals details of the actomyosin interface, which is mainly stabilized by hydrophobic interactions. The negatively charged amino (N) terminus of actin interacts with a conserved basic motif in loop 2 of myosin, promoting cleft closure in myosin. Surprisingly, the overall structure of myosin is similar to rigor-like myosin structures in the absence of F-actin, indicating that F-actin binding induces only minimal conformational changes in myosin. A comparison with pre-powerstroke and intermediate (Pi-release)\u00a0states of myosin allows us to discuss the general mechanism of myosin binding to F-actin. Our results serve as a strong foundation for the molecular understanding of cytoskeletal diseases, such as autosomal dominant hearing loss and diseases affecting skeletal and cardiac muscles, in particular nemaline myopathy and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.Frederik, P. M. and D. H. W. Hubert (2005). \"Methods in Enzymology.\" 391: 431-448.A thin aqueous film of suspended\u00a0lipid\u00a0vesicles\u29f8micelles is the object of choice for\u00a0vitrification\u00a0and subsequent study by\u00a0cryoelectron microscopy. Just prior to vitrification, a thin film (compare with a soap film) is vulnerable to heat and mass exchange. Preparation of thin films in a temperature- and humidity-controlled environment is essential to prevent osmotic and temperature-induced alterations of the lipid structure, as will be explained in this chapter. Further automation of the preparative procedure by automatic blotting and PC control over the timing of critical steps (including vitrification) may further assist in the reproducible throughput of high-quality specimens. By cryotomography, taking a tilt series under low-dose conditions, a\u00a0three-dimensional reconstruction\u00a0of the specimen can be analyzed.Kuhlbrandt, W. (2014). \"Biochemistry. The resolution revolution.\" Science 343(6178): 1443-1444.Liu, Z., Wang, J., Cheng, H., Ke, X., Sun, L., Zhang, Q. C., & Wang, H. W. (2018). Cryo-EM Structure of Human Dicer and Its Complexes with a Pre-miRNA Substrate. Cell, 173(5), 1191-1203.Human\u00a0Dicer\u00a0(hDicer) is a multi-domain protein belonging to the\u00a0RNase III\u00a0family. It plays pivotal roles\u00a0in\u00a0small RNA\u00a0biogenesis during the\u00a0RNA interference\u00a0(RNAi) pathway by processing a diverse range of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) precursors to generate \u223c22 nt\u00a0microRNA\u00a0(miRNA) or\u00a0small interfering RNA\u00a0(siRNA) products for sequence-directed\u00a0gene silencing. In this work, we solved the\u00a0cryoelectron microscopy\u00a0(cryo-EM) structure of hDicer in complex with its\u00a0cofactor\u00a0protein\u00a0TRBP\u00a0and revealed the precise spatial arrangement of hDicer\u2019s multiple\u00a0domains. We further solved structures of the hDicer-TRBP complex bound with pre-let-7 RNA in two distinct conformations. In combination with biochemical analysis, these structures reveal a property of the hDicer-TRBP complex to promote the stability of pre-miRNA\u2019s stem duplex in a pre-dicing state. These results provide insights into the\u00a0mechanism of\u00a0RNA processing\u00a0by hDicer and illustrate the regulatory role of hDicer\u2019s\u00a0N-terminal\u00a0helicase\u00a0domain.Passmore, L. A. and C. J. Russo (2016). \"Specimen preparation for high-resolution cryo-EM.\" Methods in enzymology 579: 51-86.Imaging a material with electrons at near-atomic resolution requires a thin specimen that is stable in the vacuum of the transmission\u00a0electron microscope. For biological samples, this comprises a thin layer of frozen\u00a0aqueous solution\u00a0containing the\u00a0biomolecular complex\u00a0of interest. The process of preparing a high-quality specimen is often the limiting step in the determination of structures by single-particle\u00a0electron cryomicroscopy\u00a0(cryo-EM). Here, we describe a systematic approach for going from a purified biomolecular complex in aqueous solution to high-resolution electron micrographs that are suitable for 3D\u00a0structure determination. This includes a series of protocols for the preparation of\u00a0vitrified\u00a0specimens on various supports, including all-gold and\u00a0graphene. We also describe techniques for troubleshooting when a preparation fails to yield suitable specimens, and common mistakes to avoid during each part of the process. Finally, we include recommendations for obtaining the highest quality micrographs from prepared specimens with current microscope, detector, and support technology.Sun, F. (2018). Orienting the future of bio-macromolecular electron microscopy. Chinese Physics B, 27(6), 063601.With 40 years of development, bio-macromolecule cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) has completed its revolution in terms of resolution and currently plays a highly important role in structural biology study. According to different specimen states, cryo-EM involves three specific techniques: single-particle analysis (SPA), electron tomography and subtomogram averaging, and electron diffraction. None of these three techniques have realized their full potential for solving the structures of bio-macromolecules and therefore need additional development. In this review, the current existing bottlenecks of cryo-EM SPA are discussed with theoretical analysis, which include the air\u2013water interface during specimen cryo-vitrification, bio-macromolecular conformational heterogeneity, focus gradient within thick specimens, and electron radiation damage. Furthermore, potential solutions of these bottlenecks worthy of further investigation are proposed and discussed. Cryosol WorldHomeVitroJetPublicationsAboutContactLatest News CryoSol-World welcomes Frank Nijpels as a new team member Diekirch-Valkenswaard bicycle tour Proof-of-principle of the VitroJet CryoSol-World is foundedView All NewsUpcoming Events Journ\u00e9e Roger Monier, Institut Curie, Paris, France, April 5, 2019 April 5 CCP-EM Spring Symposium, Nottingham University, April 29 \u2013 May 1, 2019 April 29 @ 8:00 am - May 1 @ 5:00 pm iNext workshop on Integrated Methodologies and Approaches for Structural Biology, Brno, Czech Republic, May 29 \u2013 31, 2019 May 29 @ 8:00 am - May 31 @ 5:00 pm View All Events", "Cryosol - International Permafrost Association Arctic Portal AP Community Portlets Arctic Council Science Organizations Maps Library Acronyms Links Search International Permafrost Association Fostering permafrost research to the ends of the Earth Search ... Member login Contact \ufeff Menu HomeAbout Us Antarctic Permafrost and Periglacial EnvironmentsCoastal and Offshore Permafrost Dynamics (COPD)CryosolGlaciers and Permafrost Hazards in High Mountain Slopes (GAPHAZ)Isotopes and Geochemistry of PermafrostPeriglacial Landforms, Processes and ClimatePermafrost and Climate Modeling and Mapping Subgroup Planetary Permafrost and AstrobiologyPermafrost Engineering Subgroup on Engineering Geology for Development in Permafrost Regions Task Force on Remote SensingTask Force on Subglacial PermafrostStanding Committee on Data, Information and CommunicationsStanding Committee on Education and OutreachInternational Advisory Committee for ICOPCarbon Pools in Permafrost Regions (CAPP)Arctic Circumpolar Coastal Observatory Network (ACCONET)Arctic Coastal Dynamics (ACD)International Polar Year (2007-2009) OfficersCountry MembersConstitutionResolutionsExternal RelationsStanding Committees ANTPASEducation & Outreach HistoryBecome a Member Activities Action GroupsInterest Groups Permafrost and Carbon Budgets Core Projects PRP IPA Awards Pewe AwardMelnikov AwardLifetime Award Outreach Outreach ActivitiesPYRN Meetings International ConferencesRegional Conferences Publications IPA Newsletter - Frozen GroundIPA Country ReportsPPP ReportsConference ProceedingsReports and MinutesHandbookGlossaryOccasional Publications What is Permafrost?International Report \"State of the Arctic Coast 2010\" Products Permafrost Data IPA Permafrost MapGTN-P Workshop 2015GTN-P Workshop 2013GTN-P Workshop 2011TSPCALM Mailing ListCourses (IUCP)Media PrintGalleriesPodcasts Member Area Home About Us Working parties Cryosol Cryosol 2. Cryosol Co-chairs Galina Mazhitova, Russia galina_mazhitova@mail.ru Eva-Maria Pfeiffer, Germany empfeiffer@ifb.uni-hamburg.de Statement of Goals: Link the knowledge about cryosols in both hemispheres including Arctic, Antarctic and mountain regions Evaluate what will happen with regional C-pools under ongoing climate and environmental changes Contribute knowledge about Cryosol related processes for climate, hydrology, and ecological modelling Teach young permafrost students/scientists about the diversity and importance of cryosols as a basic knowledge for the protection of cold ecosystems Activities Organizing a bipolar CWG workshop \u201cClimate Change and Cryosols\u201d Publish a review (trend) paper on Cryosols of both hemispheres under a changing climate V International Conference on Cryopedology (2009, Ulan-Ude, Russia), IUSS Congress (2010, Brisbane, Australia), field trip to Antarctica on Correlation of Antarctic and Arctic soil processes (2010 or 2011) Web page: http://www.geowiss.uni-hamburg.de/i-boden/CWG-IPA-IUSS/index.htmlLiaison person with SCDIC: Eva-Maria PfeifferLiaison international organisations and programmes: IUSS, CAPP, GCP, ANTPAS, CALM Officers Country Members Constitution Resolutions External Relations Standing Committees ANTPAS Education & Outreach History Become a Member Contact: contact@ipa-permafrost.orgThe International Permafrost Association website is designed and hosted by the Arctic PortalCopyright \u00a9 2008-2015 International Permafrost Association All Rights Reserved IPA on Facebook IPA on Twitter IPA on Youtube IPA RSS", "Histosol | FAO soil group | Britannica.com ENCYCLOP\u00c6DIA BRITANNICA START YOUR FREE TRIAL Log In \u00b7 Join Demystified Quizzes Galleries Lists On This Day Biographies Newsletters START YOUR FREE TRIAL Search Britannica What are you looking for? Search Click here to search Browse popular topics: Crystal Palace Victoria Monroe Doctrine Kepler's laws of planetary motion Open Door policy Bring fact-checked results to the top of your browser search. Learn More. HistosolFAO soil group Written By: The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica See Article History Histosol, one of the 30 soil groups in the classification system of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). Histosols are low-density, acidic soils with a high proportion of organic material. Formed mainly in cold climates and under waterlogged conditions, they are the most common soil in northern Finland, in western Scotland, in central Canada, and east of the Urals in Russia. They also occur in the bogs and swamps of Ireland, Angola, Bangladesh, and Guyana. Histosols are estimated to cover just over 2.5 percent of the continental land area on Earth, 80 percent of this in cold or boreal climatic zones. Their agricultural use is limited by cold climate, waterlogging, and low fertility.Histosols are technically characterized by organic materials whose cumulative thickness makes up at least half of the upper 80 cm (about 2 feet) of the soil profile. They are identified as fibric if the organic materials show little or no decomposition and as terric if the organic materials are highly decomposed, dark in colour, and not conducive to drainage. They are similar in all respects to the Histosol order of the U.S. Soil Taxonomy. Learn More in these related Britannica articles: soil: FAO soil groups The classification system of the FAO primarily involves a two-level nomenclature comprising the name of a soil group and a modifying adjective that serves to identify a soil unit within a group on the FAO Soil Map of the World. It is not meant to substitute for\u2026 bog Bog, type of wetland ecosystem characterized by wet, spongy, poorly drained peaty soil. Bogs can be divided into three types: (1) typical bogs of cool regions, dominated by the growth of bog mosses, Sphagnum, and heaths, particularly Chamaedaphne (northern bogs with trees growing on them are often called muskegs); (2)\u2026 swamp Swamp, wetland ecosystem characterized by mineral soils with poor drainage and by plant life dominated by trees. The latter characteristic distinguishes a swamp from a marsh, in which plant life consists largely of grasses. Swamps are found throughout the world. They exist in areas with poor drainage and sufficient water\u2026 Histosol Histosol, one of the 12 soil orders in the U.S. Soil Taxonomy. Histosols are formed under waterlogged conditions typical of peat bogs, moors, and swamps. Under such conditions, the accumulated tissues of dead plants and animals and their decomposition products are preserved, resulting in soils of high organic content. After\u2026 Article History Article Contributors Feedback Corrections? Updates? Help us improve this article! Contact our editors with your feedback. Histosol Quick Facts related topicsSoil Edit Mode Histosol FAO soil group Tips for Editing Leave Edit Mode Submit Tips For Editing We welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. You can make it easier for us to review and, hopefully, publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind. Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience. You may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered. Any text you add should be original, not copied from other sources. At the bottom of the article, feel free to list any sources that support your changes, so that we can fully understand their context. (Internet URLs are the best.) Your contribution may be further edited by our staff, and its publication is subject to our final approval. Unfortunately, our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions. Submit Thank You for Your Contribution! Our editors will review what you've submitted, and if it meets our criteria, we'll add it to the article. Please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors, and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed. Uh Oh There was a problem with your submission. Please try again later. Close Keep Exploring Britannica Ocean Ocean, continuous body of salt water that is contained in enormous basins on Earth\u2019s surface. When viewed\u2026 Read this Article World Heritage site World Heritage site, any of various areas or objects inscribed on the United Nations Educational, Scientific\u2026 Read this Article Aurora Aurora, luminous phenomenon of Earth\u2019s upper atmosphere that occurs primarily in high latitudes of both\u2026 Read this Article View More Stay Connected Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Pinterest Newsletters About Us About Our Ads Partner Program Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use \u00a92019 Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica, Inc. Menu Home Demystified Quizzes Galleries Lists On This Day Biographies Newsletters Login Join Histosol FAO soil group Article Media Print Cite Share SHARE Facebook Twitter Feedback Feedback Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login). Select feedback type: Select a type (Required) Factual Correction Spelling/Grammar Correction Link Correction Additional Information Other Submit Feedback If you prefer to suggest your own revision of the article, you can go to edit mode (requires login). Thank you for your feedback Our editors will review what you\u2019ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. Join Britannica's Publishing Partner Program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work! Share SHARE Facebook Twitter Search \u00d7 close Britannica Celebrates 100 Women Trailblazers", "Cryosol | FAO soil group | Britannica.com ENCYCLOP\u00c6DIA BRITANNICA START YOUR FREE TRIAL Log In \u00b7 Join Demystified Quizzes Galleries Lists On This Day Biographies Newsletters START YOUR FREE TRIAL Search Britannica What are you looking for? Search Click here to search Browse popular topics: Crystal Palace Victoria Monroe Doctrine Kepler's laws of planetary motion Open Door policy Bring fact-checked results to the top of your browser search. Learn More. CryosolFAO soil group Written By: The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica See Article History Cryosol, one of the 30 soil groups in the classification system of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). Cryosols are characterized by frozen soil within 1 metre (39 inches) of the land surface and by waterlogging during periods of thaw. They often show disrupted soil layers, cracks, or patterned surface features such as frost mounds, caused by the physical actions of ice formation and melting. Cryosols may be either mineral soils or humus-rich materials. Occupying about 17.7 million square km (6.83 million square miles) in the Arctic regions and in Antarctica, Cryosols are found principally in the wilds of Alaska, Canada, China, and Russia in the Northern Hemisphere. They are associated frequently with Gleysols, Histosols, and Podzols. Learn More in these related Britannica articles: tundra: Soils as Gelisols or Cryosols, depending on the soil classification system used. Both are easily eroded soil types characterized by the presence of permafrost and showing an active surface layer shaped by the alternating freezing and thawing that comes with seasonal variations in temperature. In the higher latitudes of\u2026 soil: FAO soil groups The classification system of the FAO primarily involves a two-level nomenclature comprising the name of a soil group and a modifying adjective that serves to identify a soil unit within a group on the FAO Soil Map of the World. It is not meant to substitute for\u2026 humus Humus, nonliving, finely divided organic matter in soil, derived from microbial decomposition of plant and animal substances. Humus, which ranges in colour from brown to black, consists of about 60 percent carbon, 6 percent nitrogen, and smaller amounts of phosphorus and sulfur. As humus decomposes, its components are changed into\u2026 Gleysol Gleysol, one of the 30 soil groups in the classification system of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). Gleysols are formed under waterlogged conditions produced by rising groundwater. In the tropics and subtropics they are cultivated for rice or, after drainage, for field crops and trees. Gleysols found in the\u2026 Histosol Histosol, one of the 30 soil groups in the classification system of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). Histosols are low-density, acidic soils with a high proportion of organic material. Formed mainly in cold climates and under waterlogged conditions, they are the most common soil in northern Finland, in western\u2026 ADDITIONAL MEDIAMore About Cryosol1 reference found in Britannica articlesAssorted Referencestundra In tundra: Soils Article History Article Contributors Feedback Corrections? Updates? Help us improve this article! Contact our editors with your feedback. Cryosol Quick Facts View Media Page related topicsSoil Edit Mode Cryosol FAO soil group Tips for Editing Leave Edit Mode Submit Tips For Editing We welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. You can make it easier for us to review and, hopefully, publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind. Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience. You may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered. Any text you add should be original, not copied from other sources. At the bottom of the article, feel free to list any sources that support your changes, so that we can fully understand their context. (Internet URLs are the best.) Your contribution may be further edited by our staff, and its publication is subject to our final approval. Unfortunately, our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions. Submit Thank You for Your Contribution! Our editors will review what you've submitted, and if it meets our criteria, we'll add it to the article. Please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors, and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed. Uh Oh There was a problem with your submission. Please try again later. Close Keep Exploring Britannica Plate tectonics Plate tectonics, theory dealing with the dynamics of Earth\u2019s outer shell\u2014the lithosphere\u2014that revolutionized\u2026 Read this Article Aurora Aurora, luminous phenomenon of Earth\u2019s upper atmosphere that occurs primarily in high latitudes of both\u2026 Read this Article World Heritage site World Heritage site, any of various areas or objects inscribed on the United Nations Educational, Scientific\u2026 Read this Article View More Stay Connected Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Pinterest Newsletters About Us About Our Ads Partner Program Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use \u00a92019 Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica, Inc. Menu Home Demystified Quizzes Galleries Lists On This Day Biographies Newsletters Login Join Cryosol FAO soil group Article Media Print Cite Share SHARE Facebook Twitter Feedback Feedback Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login). Select feedback type: Select a type (Required) Factual Correction Spelling/Grammar Correction Link Correction Additional Information Other Submit Feedback If you prefer to suggest your own revision of the article, you can go to edit mode (requires login). Thank you for your feedback Our editors will review what you\u2019ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. Join Britannica's Publishing Partner Program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work! Share SHARE Facebook Twitter Search \u00d7 close Britannica Celebrates 100 Women Trailblazers", "Cryosolona drug & pharmaceuticals. Available Forms, Doses, Prices Home \u00a0 | \u00a0 Drugs \u00a0 | \u00a0 Ingredients \u00a0 | Pharma Companies \u00a0 | \u00a0 ATC \u00a0 | \u00a0 ICD DRUGS & SUPPLEMENTS Cryosolona advertisement How long you have been taking the medicine?1 day 2 days 3 days 5 days 1 week 2 weeks 1 month 3 month > 3 month Cryosolona usesIndications and usageContraindicationsWarningsPrecautionsAdverse reactionsOverdosageDosage and administrationStorage conditionsHow suppliedCryosolona reviews INDICATIONS AND USAGE When oral therapy is not feasible, and the strength, dosage form, and route of administration of the drug reasonably lend the preparation to the treatment of the condition, the intravenous or intramuscular use of Cryosolona Sterile Powder is indicated as follows:Allergic states Control of severe or incapacitating allergic conditions intractable to adequate trials of conventional treatment in asthma, atopic dermatitis, contact dermatitis, drug hypersensitivity reactions, perennial or seasonal allergic rhinitis, serum sickness, transfusion reactions.Dermatologic diseases Bullous dermatitis herpetiformis, exfoliative erythroderma, mycosis fungoides, pemphigus, severe erythema multiforme.Endocrine disorders Primary or secondary adrenocortical insufficiency (hydrocortisone or cortisone is the drug of choice; synthetic analogs may be used in conjunction with mineralocorticoids where applicable; in infancy, mineralocorticoid supplementation is of particular importance), congenital adrenal hyperplasia, hypercalcemia associated with cancer, nonsuppurative thyroiditis. Gastrointestinal diseases To tide the patient over a critical period of the disease in regional enteritis and ulcerative colitis.Hematologic disorders Acquired (autoimmune) hemolytic anemia, congenital (erythroid) hypoplastic anemia (Diamond-Blackfan anemia), idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura in adults (intravenous administration only; intramuscular administration is contraindicated), pure red cell aplasia, selected cases of secondary thrombocytopenia.Miscellaneous Trichinosis with neurologic or myocardial involvement, tuberculous meningitis with subarachnoid block or impending block when used concurrently with appropriate antituberculous chemotherapy.Neoplastic diseases For the palliative management of leukemias and lymphomas.Nervous System Acute exacerbations of multiple sclerosis; cerebral edema associated with primary or metastatic brain tumor, or craniotomy.Ophthalmic diseases Sympathetic ophthalmia, uveitis and ocular inflammatory conditions unresponsive to topical corticosteroids.Renal diseases To induce diuresis or remission of proteinuria in idiopathic nephrotic syndrome or that due to lupus erythematosus.Respiratory diseases Berylliosis, fulminating or disseminated pulmonary tuberculosis when used concurrently with appropriate antituberculous chemotherapy, idiopathic eosinophilic pneumonias, symptomatic sarcoidosis.Rheumatic disorders As adjunctive therapy for short-term administration (to tide the patient over an acute episode or exacerbation) in acute gouty arthritis; acute rheumatic carditis; ankylosing spondylitis; psoriatic arthritis; rheumatoid arthritis, including juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (selected cases may require low-dose maintenance therapy). For the treatment of dermatomyositis, temporal arteritis, polymyositis, and systemic lupus erythematosus. advertisement CONTRAINDICATIONS Cryosolona Sterile Powder is contraindicated: in systemic fungal infections and patients with known hypersensitivity to the product and its constituents. The Cryosolona 40 mg presentation includes lactose monohydrate produced from cow's milk. This presentation is therefore contraindicated in patients with a known or suspected hypersensitivity to cow's milk or its components or other dairy products because it may contain trace amounts of milk ingredients. for intrathecal administration. Reports of severe medical events have been associated with this route of administration. Intramuscular corticosteroid preparations are contraindicated for idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura.Additional contraindication for the use of Cryosolona Sterile Powder preserved with benzyl alcohol:Formulations preserved with benzyl alcohol are contraindicated for use in premature infants. (See WARNINGS and PRECAUTIONS, Pediatric Use .) WARNINGS Serious Neurologic Adverse Reactions with Epidural Administration Serious neurologic events, some resulting in death, have been reported with epidural injection of corticosteroids. Specific events reported include, but are not limited to, spinal cord infarction, paraplegia, quadriplegia, cortical blindness, and stroke. These serious neurologic events have been reported with and without use of fluoroscopy. The safety and effectiveness of epidural administration of corticosteroids have not been established, and corticosteroids are not approved for this use.General Formulations with preservative contain benzyl alcohol, which is potentially toxic when administered locally to neural tissue. Exposure to excessive amounts of benzyl alcohol has been associated with toxicity (hypotension, metabolic acidosis), particularly in neonates, and an increased incidence of kernicterus, particularly in small preterm infants. There have been rare reports of deaths, primarily in preterm infants, associated with exposure to excessive amounts of benzyl alcohol. The amount of benzyl alcohol from medications is usually considered negligible compared to that received in flush solutions containing benzyl alcohol. Administration of high dosages of medications containing this preservative must take into account the total amount of benzyl alcohol administered. The amount of benzyl alcohol at which toxicity may occur is not known. If the patient requires more than the recommended dosages or other medications containing this preservative, the practitioner must consider the daily metabolic load of benzyl alcohol from these combined sources (see PRECAUTIONS, Pediatric Use ).Injection of Cryosolona may result in dermal and/or subdermal changes forming depressions in the skin at the injection site. In order to minimize the incidence of dermal and subdermal atrophy, care must be exercised not to exceed recommended doses in injections. Injection into the deltoid muscle should be avoided because of a high incidence of subcutaneous atrophy.Rare instances of anaphylactoid reactions have occurred in patients receiving corticosteroid therapy (see ADVERSE REACTIONS ).In patients receiving the 40 mg presentation of Cryosolona during the treatment for acute allergic conditions and where these symptoms worsen or any new allergic symptoms occur, consideration should be given to the potential for hypersensitivity reactions to cow's milk ingredients (see CONTRAINDICATIONS ). If appropriate, administration of Cryosolona should be stopped, and the patient's condition should be treated accordingly. Alternative treatments, including the use of corticosteroid formulations that do not contain ingredients produced from cow's milk, should be considered for acute allergy management, where appropriate.Increased dosage of rapidly acting corticosteroids is indicated in patients on corticosteroid therapy who are subjected to any unusual stress before, during, and after the stressful situation.Results from one multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled study with Cryosolona hemisuccinate, an intravenous corticosteroid, showed an increase in early (at 2 weeks) and late (at 6 months) mortality in patients with cranial trauma who were determined not to have other clear indications for corticosteroid treatment. High doses of systemic corticosteroids, including Cryosolona, should not be used for the treatment of traumatic brain injury.Cardio-renal Average and large doses of corticosteroids can cause elevation of blood pressure, salt and water retention, and increased excretion of potassium. These effects are less likely to occur with the synthetic derivatives except when used in large doses. Dietary salt restriction and potassium supplementation may be necessary. All corticosteroids increase calcium excretion.Literature reports suggest an apparent association between the use of corticosteroids and left ventricular free wall rupture after a recent myocardial infarction; therefore, therapy with corticosteroids should be used with great caution in these patients.Endocrine Hypothalamic-pituitary adrenal axis suppression, Cushing's syndrome, and hyperglycemia. Monitor patients for these conditions with chronic use.Corticosteroids can produce reversible HPA axis suppression with the potential for glucocorticosteroid insufficiency after withdrawal of treatment. Drug induced secondary adrenocortical insufficiency may be minimized by gradual reduction of dosage. This type of relative insufficiency may persist for months after discontinuation of therapy; therefore, in any situation of stress occurring during that period, hormone therapy should be reinstituted.Drug-Induced Liver Injury Rarely, high doses of cyclically pulsed intravenous Cryosolona (usually for the treatment of exacerbations of multiple sclerosis at doses of 1 gram/day) can induce a toxic form of acute hepatitis. The time to onset of this form of steroid-induced liver injury can be several weeks or longer. Resolution has been observed after discontinuation of treatment. However, serious liver injury can occur, sometimes resulting in acute liver failure and death. Discontinue intravenous Cryosolona if toxic hepatitis occurs. Since recurrence has occurred after re-challenge, avoid use of high dose intravenous Cryosolona in patients with a history of toxic hepatitis caused by Cryosolona.Infections General Patients who are on corticosteroids are more susceptible to infections than are healthy individuals. There may be decreased resistance and inability to localize infection when corticosteroids are used. Infections with any pathogen in any location of the body may be associated with the use of corticosteroids alone or in combination with other immunosuppressive agents.These infections may be mild, but can be severe and at times fatal. With increasing doses of corticosteroids, the rate of occurrence of infectious complications increases. Corticosteroids may also mask some signs of current infection. Do not use intra-articularly, intrabursally or for intratendinous administration for local effect in the presence of acute local infection.A study has failed to establish the efficacy of Cryosolona sodium succinate in the treatment of sepsis syndrome and septic shock. The study also suggests that treatment of these conditions with Cryosolona sodium succinate may increase the risk of mortality in certain patients (i.e., patients with elevated serum creatinine levels or patients who develop secondary infections after Cryosolona sodium succinate).Fungal infections Corticosteroids may exacerbate systemic fungal infections and therefore should not be used in the presence of such infections unless they are needed to control drug reactions. There have been cases reported in which concomitant use of amphotericin B and hydrocortisone was followed by cardiac enlargement and congestive heart failure (see CONTRAINDICATIONS and PRECAUTIONS, Drug Interactions, Amphotericin B injection and potassium-depleting agents ).Special pathogens Latent disease may be activated or there may be an exacerbation of intercurrent infections due to pathogens, including those caused by Amoeba, Candida, Cryptococcus, Mycobacterium, Nocardia, Pneumocystis, Toxoplasma.It is recommended that latent amebiasis or active amebiasis be ruled out before initiating corticosteroid therapy in any patient who has spent time in the tropics or in any patient with unexplained diarrhea.Similarly, corticosteroids should be used with great care in patients with known or suspected Strongyloides infestation. In such patients, corticosteroid-induced immunosuppression may lead to Strongyloides hyperinfection and dissemination with widespread larval migration, often accompanied by severe enterocolitis and potentially fatal gram-negative septicemia.Corticosteroids should not be used in cerebral malaria. There is currently no evidence of benefit from steroids in this condition.Tuberculosis The use of corticosteroids in active tuberculosis should be restricted to those cases of fulminating or disseminated tuberculosis in which the corticosteroid is used for the management of the disease in conjunction with appropriate antituberculous regimen.If corticosteroids are indicated in patients with latent tuberculosis or tuberculin reactivity, close observation is necessary as reactivation of the disease may occur. During prolonged corticosteroid therapy, these patients should receive chemoprophylaxis.Vaccination Administration of live or live, attenuated vaccines is contraindicated in patients receiving immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids. Killed or inactivated vaccines may be administered. However, the response to such vaccines can not be predicted. Immunization procedures may be undertaken in patients receiving corticosteroids as replacement therapy, e.g., for Addison's disease.Viral infections Chicken pox and measles can have a more serious or even fatal course in pediatric and adult patients on corticosteroids. In pediatric and adult patients who have not had these diseases, particular care should be taken to avoid exposure. The contribution of the underlying disease and/or prior corticosteroid treatment to the risk is also not known. If exposed to chicken pox, prophylaxis with varicella zoster immune globulin may be indicated. If exposed to measles, prophylaxis with immunoglobulin (IG) may be indicated. If chicken pox develops, treatment with antiviral agents should be considered.Neurologic Reports of severe medical events have been associated with the intrathecal route of administration (see ADVERSE REACTIONS, Gastrointestinal and Neurologic/Psychiatric ).Ophthalmic Use of corticosteroids may produce posterior subcapsular cataracts, glaucoma with possible damage to the optic nerves, and may enhance the establishment of secondary ocular infections due to bacteria, fungi, or viruses. The use of oral corticosteroids is not recommended in the treatment of optic neuritis and may lead to an increase in the risk of new episodes. Corticosteroids should be used cautiously in patients with ocular herpes simplex because of corneal perforation. Corticosteroids should not be used in active ocular herpes simplex. advertisement PRECAUTIONS General This product, like many other steroid formulations, is sensitive to heat. Therefore, it should not be autoclaved when it is desirable to sterilize the exterior of the vial.The lowest possible dose of corticosteroid should be used to control the condition under treatment. When reduction in dosage is possible, the reduction should be gradual.Since complications of treatment with glucocorticoids are dependent on the size of the dose and the duration of treatment, a risk/benefit decision must be made in each individual case as to dose and duration of treatment and as to whether daily or intermittent therapy should be used.Kaposi's sarcoma has been reported to occur in patients receiving corticosteroid therapy, most often for chronic conditions. Discontinuation of corticosteroids may result in clinical improvement.Cardio-renal As sodium retention with resultant edema and potassium loss may occur in patients receiving corticosteroids, these agents should be used with caution in patients with congestive heart failure, hypertension, or renal insufficiency.Endocrine Drug-induced secondary adrenocortical insufficiency may be minimized by gradual reduction of dosage. This type of relative insufficiency may persist for months after discontinuation of therapy; therefore, in any situation of stress occurring during that period, hormone therapy should be reinstituted.Metabolic clearance of corticosteroids is decreased in hypothyroid patients and increased in hyperthyroid patients. Changes in thyroid status of the patient may necessitate adjustment in dosage.Gastrointestinal Steroids should be used with caution in active or latent peptic ulcers, diverticulitis, fresh intestinal anastomoses, and nonspecific ulcerative colitis, since they may increase the risk of a perforation. Signs of peritoneal irritation following gastrointestinal perforation in patients receiving corticosteroids may be minimal or absent.There is an enhanced effect due to decreased metabolism of corticosteroids in patients with cirrhosis.Musculoskeletal Corticosteroids decrease bone formation and increase bone resorption both through their effect on calcium regulation and inhibition of osteoblast function. This, together with a decrease in the protein matrix of the bone secondary to an increase in protein catabolism, and reduced sex hormone production, may lead to inhibition of bone growth in pediatric patients and the development of osteoporosis at any age. Special consideration should be given to patients at increased risk of osteoporosis (i.e., postmenopausal women) before initiating corticosteroid therapy.Local injection of a steroid into a previously infected site is not usually recommended.Neurologic-psychiatric Although controlled clinical trials have shown corticosteroids to be effective in speeding the resolution of acute exacerbations of multiple sclerosis, they do not show that corticosteroids affect the ultimate outcome or natural history of the disease. The studies do show that relatively high doses of corticosteroids are necessary to demonstrate a significant effect. (See DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION .)An acute myopathy has been observed with the use of high doses of corticosteroids, most often occurring in patients with disorders of neuromuscular transmission (e.g., myasthenia gravis), or in patients receiving concomitant therapy with neuromuscular blocking drugs (e.g., pancuronium). This acute myopathy is generalized, may involve ocular and respiratory muscles, and may result in quadriparesis. Elevations of creatine kinase may occur. Clinical improvement or recovery after stopping corticosteroids may require weeks to years.Psychic derangements may appear when corticosteroids are used, ranging from euphoria, insomnia, mood swings, personality changes, and severe depression, to frank psychotic manifestations. Also, existing emotional instability or psychotic tendencies may be aggravated by corticosteroids.Ophthalmic Intraocular pressure may become elevated in some individuals. If steroid therapy is continued for more than 6 weeks, intraocular pressure should be monitored.Information for Patients Patients should be warned not to discontinue the use of corticosteroids abruptly or without medical supervision, to advise any medical attendants that they are taking corticosteroids, and to seek medical advice at once should they develop fever or other signs of infection.Persons who are on corticosteroids should be warned to avoid exposure to chicken pox or measles. Patients should also be advised that if they are exposed, medical advice should be sought without delay.Drug Interactions Aminoglutethimide Aminoglutethimide may lead to a loss of corticosteroid-induced adrenal suppression.Amphotericin B injection and potassium-depleting agents When corticosteroids are administered concomitantly with potassium-depleting agents, patients should be observed closely for development of hypokalemia. There have been cases reported in which concomitant use of amphotericin B and hydrocortisone was followed by cardiac enlargement and congestive heart failure.Antibiotics Macrolide antibiotics have been reported to cause a significant decrease in corticosteroid clearance (see Drug Interactions, Hepatic Enzyme Inhibitors ).Anticholinesterases Concomitant use of anticholinesterase agents and corticosteroids may produce severe weakness in patients with myasthenia gravis. If possible, anticholinesterase agents should be withdrawn at least 24 hours before initiating corticosteroid therapy.Anticoagulants, oral Coadministration of corticosteroids and warfarin usually results in inhibition of response to warfarin, although there have been some conflicting reports. Therefore, coagulation indices should be monitored frequently to maintain the desired anticoagulant effect.Antidiabetics Because corticosteroids may increase blood glucose concentrations, dosage adjustments of antidiabetic agents may be required.Antitubercular drugs Serum concentrations of isoniazid may be decreased.Cholestyramine Cholestyramine may increase the clearance of corticosteroids.Cyclosporine Increased activity of both cyclosporine and corticosteroids may occur when the two are used concurrently. Convulsions have been reported with this concurrent use.Digitalis glycosides Patients on digitalis glycosides may be at increased risk of arrhythmias due to hypokalemia.Estrogens, including oral contraceptives Estrogens may decrease the hepatic metabolism of certain corticosteroids, thereby increasing their effect.Hepatic Enzyme Inducers Drugs which induce cytochrome P450 3A4 enzyme activity may enhance the metabolism of corticosteroids and require that the dosage of the corticosteroid be increased.Hepatic Enzyme Inhibitors Drugs which inhibit cytochrome P450 3A4 have the potential to result in increased plasma concentrations of corticosteroids.Ketoconazole Ketoconazole has been reported to significantly decrease the metabolism of certain corticosteroids by up to 60%, leading to an increased risk of corticosteroid side effects.Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents Concomitant use of aspirin (or other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents) and corticosteroids increases the risk of gastrointestinal side effects. Aspirin should be used cautiously in conjunction with corticosteroids in hypoprothrombinemia. The clearance of salicylates may be increased with concurrent use of corticosteroids.Skin tests Corticosteroids may suppress reactions to skin tests.Vaccines Patients on prolonged corticosteroid therapy may exhibit a diminished response to toxoids and live or inactivated vaccines due to inhibition of antibody response. Corticosteroids may also potentiate the replication of some organisms contained in live attenuated vaccines. Routine administration of vaccines or toxoids should be deferred until corticosteroid therapy is discontinued if possible.Carcinogenesis, Mutagenesis, Impairment of Fertility No adequate studies have been conducted in animals to determine whether corticosteroids have a potential for carcinogenesis or mutagenesis.Steroids may increase or decrease motility and number of spermatozoa in some patients.Corticosteroids have been shown to impair fertility in male rats.Pregnancy Teratogenic effects Corticosteroids have been shown to be teratogenic in many species when given in doses equivalent to the human dose. Animal studies in which corticosteroids have been given to pregnant mice, rats, and rabbits have yielded an increased incidence of cleft palate in the offspring. There are no adequate and well-controlled studies in pregnant women. Corticosteroids should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the fetus. Infants born to mothers who have received corticosteroids during pregnancy should be carefully observed for signs of hypoadrenalism.This product contains benzyl alcohol as a preservative.Benzyl alcohol can cross the placenta. See PRECAUTIONS: Pediatric use .Nursing Mothers Systemically administered corticosteroids appear in human milk and could suppress growth, interfere with endogenous corticosteroid production, or cause other untoward effects. Because of the potential for serious adverse reactions in nursing infants from corticosteroids, a decision should be made whether to continue nursing, or discontinue the drug, taking into account the importance of the drug to the mother.Pediatric Use Some formulations of this product contain benzyl alcohol as a preservative. Carefully examine vials to determine formulation that is being used.Benzyl alcohol, a component of this product, has been associated with serious adverse events and death, particularly in pediatric patients. The \"gasping syndrome\" (characterized by central nervous system depression, metabolic acidosis, gasping respirations, and high levels of benzyl alcohol and its metabolites found in the blood and urine) has been associated with benzyl alcohol dosages >99 mg/kg/day in neonates and low-birth-weight neonates. Additional symptoms may include gradual neurological deterioration, seizures, intracranial hemorrhage, hematologic abnormalities, skin breakdown, hepatic and renal failure, hypotension, bradycardia, and cardiovascular collapse. Although normal therapeutic doses of this product ordinarily delivers amounts of benzyl alcohol that are substantially lower than those reported in association with the \"gasping syndrome\", the minimum amount of benzyl alcohol at which toxicity may occur is not known. The risk of benzyl alcohol toxicity depends on the quantity administered and the hepatic capacity to detoxify the chemical. Premature and low-birth-weight infants, as well as patients receiving high dosages, may be more likely to develop toxicity. Practitioners administering this and other medications containing benzyl alcohol should consider the combined daily metabolic load of benzyl alcohol from all sources.The efficacy and safety of corticosteroids in the pediatric population are based on the well-established course of effect of corticosteroids which is similar in pediatric and adult populations. Published studies provide evidence of efficacy and safety in pediatric patients for the treatment of nephrotic syndrome (>2 years of age), and aggressive lymphomas and leukemias (>1 month of age). Other indications for pediatric use of corticosteroids, e.g., severe asthma and wheezing, are based on adequate and well-controlled trials conducted in adults, on the premises that the course of the diseases and their pathophysiology are considered to be substantially similar in both populations.The adverse effects of corticosteroids in pediatric patients are similar to those in adults (see ADVERSE REACTIONS ). Like adults, pediatric patients should be carefully observed with frequent measurements of blood pressure, weight, height, intraocular pressure, and clinical evaluation for the presence of infection, psychosocial disturbances, thromboembolism, peptic ulcers, cataracts, and osteoporosis. Pediatric patients who are treated with corticosteroids by any route, including systemically administered corticosteroids, may experience a decrease in their growth velocity. This negative impact of corticosteroids on growth has been observed at low systemic doses and in the absence of laboratory evidence of HPA axis suppression (i.e., cosyntropin stimulation and basal cortisol plasma levels). Growth velocity may therefore be a more sensitive indicator of systemic corticosteroid exposure in pediatric patients than some commonly used tests of HPA axis function. The linear growth of pediatric patients treated with corticosteroids should be monitored, and the potential growth effects of prolonged treatment should be weighed against clinical benefits obtained and the availability of treatment alternatives. In order to minimize the potential growth effects of corticosteroids, pediatric patients should be titrated to the lowest effective dose.Geriatric Use Clinical studies did not include sufficient numbers of subjects aged 65 and over to determine whether they respond differently from younger subjects. Other reported clinical experience has not identified differences in responses between the elderly and younger patients. In general, dose selection for an elderly patient should be cautious, usually starting at the low end of the dosing range, reflecting the greater frequency of decreased hepatic, renal, or cardiac function, and of concomitant disease or other drug therapy. advertisement ADVERSE REACTIONS The following adverse reactions have been reported with Cryosolona or other corticosteroids:Allergic reactions: Allergic or hypersensitivity reactions, anaphylactoid reaction, anaphylaxis, angioedema.Blood and lymphatic system disorders: Leukocytosis.Cardiovascular: Bradycardia, cardiac arrest, cardiac arrhythmias, cardiac enlargement, circulatory collapse, congestive heart failure, fat embolism, hypertension, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in premature infants, myocardial rupture following recent myocardial infarction (see WARNINGS ), pulmonary edema, syncope, tachycardia, thromboembolism, thrombophlebitis, vasculitis.Dermatologic: Acne, allergic dermatitis, burning or tingling (especially in the perineal area after intravenous injection), cutaneous and subcutaneous atrophy, dry scaly skin, ecchymoses and petechiae, edema, erythema, hyperpigmentation, hypopigmentation, impaired wound healing, increased sweating, rash, sterile abscess, striae, suppressed reactions to skin tests, thin fragile skin, thinning scalp hair, urticaria.Endocrine: Decreased carbohydrate and glucose tolerance, development of cushingoid state, glycosuria, hirsutism, hypertrichosis, increased requirements for insulin or oral hypoglycemic agents in diabetes, manifestations of latent diabetes mellitus, menstrual irregularities, secondary adrenocortical and pituitary unresponsiveness (particularly in times of stress, as in trauma, surgery, or illness), suppression of growth in pediatric patients.Fluid and electrolyte disturbances: Congestive heart failure in susceptible patients, fluid retention, hypokalemic alkalosis, potassium loss, sodium retention.Gastrointestinal: Abdominal distention, bowel/bladder dysfunction (after intrathecal administration), elevation in serum liver enzyme levels (usually reversible upon discontinuation), hepatomegaly, increased appetite, nausea, pancreatitis, peptic ulcer with possible perforation and hemorrhage, perforation of the small and large intestine (particularly in patients with inflammatory bowel disease), ulcerative esophagitis.Hepatobiliary: Hepatitis (see WARNINGS, Drug-Induced Liver Injury ).Metabolic: Negative nitrogen balance due to protein catabolism.Musculoskeletal: Aseptic necrosis of femoral and humeral heads, Charcot-like arthropathy, loss of muscle mass, muscle weakness, osteoporosis, pathologic fracture of long bones, postinjection flare (following intra-articular use), steroid myopathy, tendon rupture, vertebral compression fractures.Neurologic/Psychiatric: Convulsions, depression, emotional instability, euphoria, headache, increased intracranial pressure with papilledema (pseudotumor cerebri) usually following discontinuation of treatment, insomnia, mood swings, neuritis, neuropathy, paresthesia, personality changes, psychic disorders, vertigo. Arachnoiditis, meningitis, paraparesis/paraplegia, and sensory disturbances have occurred after intrathecal administration (see WARNINGS, Neurologic ).Ophthalmic: Exophthalmos, glaucoma, increased intraocular pressure, posterior subcapsular cataracts, rare instances of blindness associated with periocular injections.Other: Abnormal fat deposits, decreased resistance to infection, hiccups, increased or decreased motility and number of spermatozoa, injection site infections following non-sterile administration (see WARNINGS ), malaise, moon face, weight gain. advertisement OVERDOSAGE Treatment of acute overdosage is by supportive and symptomatic therapy. For chronic overdosage in the face of severe disease requiring continuous steroid therapy, the dosage of the corticosteroid may be reduced only temporarily, or alternate day treatment may be introduced. DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION NOTE: Some of the Cryosolona formulations contain benzyl alcohol Because of possible physical incompatibilities, Cryosolona should not be diluted or mixed with other solutions. Use only the accompanying diluent or Bacteriostatic Water For Injection with Benzyl Alcohol when reconstituting Cryosolona. Use within 48 hours after mixing.Parenteral drug products should be inspected visually for particulate matter and discoloration prior to administration, whenever solution and container permit.This preparation may be administered by intravenous injection, by intravenous infusion, or by intramuscular injection, the preferred method for initial emergency use being intravenous injection. Following the initial emergency period, consideration should be given to employing a longer acting injectable preparation or an oral preparation.There are reports of cardiac arrhythmias and/or cardiac arrest following the rapid administration of large intravenous doses of Cryosolona (greater than 0.5 gram administered over a period of less than 10 minutes). Bradycardia has been reported during or after the administration of large doses of Cryosolona sodium succinate, and may be unrelated to the speed or duration of infusion. When high dose therapy is desired, the recommended dose of Cryosolona Sterile Powder is 30 mg/kg administered intravenously over at least 30 minutes. This dose may be repeated every 4 to 6 hours for 48 hours.In general, high dose corticosteroid therapy should be continued only until the patient's condition has stabilized; usually not beyond 48 to 72 hours.In other indications, initial dosage will vary from 10 to 40 mg of Cryosolona depending on the specific disease entity being treated. However, in certain overwhelming, acute, life-threatening situations, administrations in dosages exceeding the usual dosages may be justified and may be in multiples of the oral dosages.It Should Be Emphasized that Dosage Requirements are Variable and Must Be Individualized on the Basis of the Disease Under Treatment and the Response of the Patient. After a favorable response is noted, the proper maintenance dosage should be determined by decreasing the initial drug dosage in small decrements at appropriate time intervals until the lowest dosage which will maintain an adequate clinical response is reached. Situations which may make dosage adjustments necessary are changes in clinical status secondary to remissions or exacerbations in the disease process, the patient's individual drug responsiveness, and the effect of patient exposure to stressful situations not directly related to the disease entity under treatment. In this latter situation, it may be necessary to increase the dosage of the corticosteroid for a period of time consistent with the patient's condition. If after long-term therapy the drug is to be stopped, it is recommended that it be withdrawn gradually rather than abruptly.Cryosolona may be administered by intravenous or intramuscular injection or by intravenous infusion, the preferred method for initial emergency use being intravenous injection. To administer by intravenous (or intramuscular) injection, prepare solution as directed. The desired dose may be administered intravenously over a period of several minutes. If desired, the medication may be administered in diluted solutions by adding Water for Injection or other suitable diluent to the Act-O-Vial and withdrawing the indicated dose.To prepare solutions for intravenous infusion, first prepare the solution for injection as directed. This solution may then be added to indicated amounts of 5% dextrose in water, isotonic saline solution, or 5% dextrose in isotonic saline solution.In pediatric patients, the initial dose of Cryosolona may vary depending on the specific disease entity being treated. The range of initial doses is 0.11 to 1.6 mg/kg/day in three or four divided doses (3.2 to 48 mg/m2bsa/day).The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) recommended dosing for systemic prednisone, prednisolone, or Cryosolona in pediatric patients whose asthma is uncontrolled by inhaled corticosteroids and long-acting bronchodilators is 1\u20132 mg/kg/day in single or divided doses. It is further recommended that short course, or \"burst\" therapy, be continued until the patient achieves a peak expiratory flow rate of 80% of his or her personal best or until symptoms resolve. This usually requires 3 to 10 days of treatment, although it can take longer. There is no evidence that tapering the dose after improvement will prevent a relapse.Dosage may be reduced for infants and children but should be governed more by the severity of the condition and response of the patient than by age or size. It should not be less than 0.5 mg per kg every 24 hours.Dosage must be decreased or discontinued gradually when the drug has been administered for more than a few days. If a period of spontaneous remission occurs in a chronic condition, treatment should be discontinued. Routine laboratory studies, such as urinalysis, two-hour postprandial blood sugar, determination of blood pressure and body weight, and a chest X-ray should be made at regular intervals during prolonged therapy. Upper GI X-rays are desirable in patients with an ulcer history or significant dyspepsia.In treatment of acute exacerbations of multiple sclerosis, daily doses of 160 mg of Cryosolona for a week followed by 64 mg every other day for 1 month have been shown to be effective (see PRECAUTIONS, Neurologic-psychiatric ).For the purpose of comparison, the following is the equivalent milligram dosage of the various glucocorticoids: Cortisone, 25 Triamcinolone, 4 Hydrocortisone, 20 Paramethasone, 2 Prednisolone, 5 Betamethasone, 0.75 Prednisone, 5 Dexamethasone, 0.75 Cryosolona, 4 These dose relationships apply only to oral or intravenous administration of these compounds. When these substances or their derivatives are injected intramuscularly or into joint spaces, their relative properties may be greatly altered. DIRECTIONS FOR USING THE ACT-O-VIAL SYSTEM Press down on plastic activator to force diluent into the lower compartment. Gently agitate to effect solution. Remove plastic tab covering center of stopper. Sterilize top of stopper with a suitable germicide. Insert needle squarely through center of stopper until tip is just visible. Invert vial and withdraw dose. Figure STORAGE CONDITIONS Protect from light.Store unreconstituted product at controlled room temperature 20\u00b0 to 25\u00b0C (68\u00b0 to 77\u00b0F).Store solution at controlled room temperature 20\u00b0 to 25\u00b0C (68\u00b0 to 77\u00b0F).Use solution within 48 hours after mixing. HOW SUPPLIED Cryosolona Sterile Powder preserved with benzyl alcohol is available in the following packages: 500 mg (Multi-Dose Vial) 8 mL NDC 0009-0758-01 1 gram (Multi-Dose Vial) 16 mL NDC 0009-0698-012 gram Vial with Diluent NDC 0009-0796-01 Cryosolona Sterile Powder preservative-free is available in the following packages: 40 mg Act-O-Vial System (Single-Use Vial) 25 \u00d71 mL NDC 0009-0039-28125 mg Act-O-Vial System (Single-Use Vial) 25 \u00d7 2 mL NDC 0009-0047-22500 mg Act-O-Vial System (Single-Use Vial) 4 mL NDC 0009-0003-02 1 gram Act-O-Vial System (Single-Use Vial) 8 mL NDC 0009-0018-20 This product's label may have been updated. For current full prescribing information, please visit www.pfizer.com.LAB-0161-12.0May 2017Logo NDC 0009-0758-01Multi-dose vial.Discard unused portion. Cryosolona \u00ae (methylprednisolone sodiumsuccinate for injection, USP)500 mg* per vial This Package Does Not Contain Diluent.Recommended Diluent (Bacteriostatic Waterfor Injection) Contains Benzyl Alcohol as aPreservative.Rx only Cryosolona pharmaceutical active ingredients containing related brand and generic drugs: Active ingredient is the part of the drug or medicine which is biologically active. This portion of the drug is responsible for the main action of the drug which is intended to cure or reduce the symptom or disease. The other portions of the drug which are inactive are called excipients; there role is to act as vehicle or binder. In contrast to active ingredient, the inactive ingredient's role is not significant in the cure or treatment of the disease. There can be one or more active ingredients in a drug. Methylprednisolone Sodium Succinate Cryosolona available forms, composition, doses: Form of the medicine is the form in which the medicine is marketed in the market, for example, a medicine X can be in the form of capsule or the form of chewable tablet or the form of tablet. Sometimes same medicine can be available as injection form. Each medicine cannot be in all forms but can be marketed in 1, 2, or 3 forms which the pharmaceutical company decided based on various background research results.Composition is the list of ingredients which combinedly form a medicine. Both active ingredients and inactive ingredients form the composition. The active ingredient gives the desired therapeutic effect whereas the inactive ingredient helps in making the medicine stable.Doses are various strengths of the medicine like 10mg, 20mg, 30mg and so on. Each medicine comes in various doses which is decided by the manufacturer, that is, pharmaceutical company. The dose is decided on the severity of the symptom or disease. Injectable; Injection; Methylprednisolone Sodium Succinate 500 mg Cryosolona destination | category: Destination is defined as the organism to which the drug or medicine is targeted. For most of the drugs what we discuss, human is the drug destination.Drug category can be defined as major classification of the drug. For example, an antihistaminic or an antipyretic or anti anginal or pain killer, anti-inflammatory or so. Human: Adrenals Anti-inflammatory agents Corticosteroid hormones Eye corticosteroids Oestrogens and progesterones and related synthetic drugs Topical corticosteroids Treatment of dermatological diseases Weak (group I) corticosteroids Cryosolona Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical codes: A medicine is classified depending on the organ or system it acts [Anatomical], based on what result it gives on what disease, symptom [Therapeutical], based on chemical composition [Chemical]. It is called as ATC code. The code is based on Active ingredients of the medicine. A medicine can have different codes as sometimes it acts on different organs for different indications. Same way, different brands with same active ingredients and same indications can have same ATC code. D07AA01 - Methylprednisolone D10AA02 - Methylprednisolone H02AB04 - Methylprednisolone Cryosolona pharmaceutical companies: Pharmaceutical companies are drug manufacturing companies that help in complete development of the drug from the background research to formation, clinical trials, release of the drug into the market and marketing of the drug.Researchers are the persons who are responsible for the scientific research and is responsible for all the background clinical trials that resulted in the development of the drug. Cryopharma Pizzard y Salud advertisement References Dailymed.\"SOLU-MEDROL (METHYLPREDNISOLONE SODIUM SUCCINATE) INJECTION, POWDER, FOR SOLUTION SOLU-MEDROL (METHYLPREDNISOLONE SODIUM SUCCINATE) KIT [PHARMACIA AND \". https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailym... (accessed August 28, 2018). Dailymed.\"METHYLPREDNISOLONE: DailyMed provides trustworthy information about marketed drugs in the United States. DailyMed is the official provider of FDA label information (package inserts).\". https://dailymed.nlm.nih.gov/dailym... (accessed August 28, 2018). \"methylprednisolone\". https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/co... (accessed August 28, 2018). Frequently asked Questions Can i drive or operate heavy machine after consuming Cryosolona?Depending on the reaction of the Cryosolona after taken, if you are feeling dizziness, drowsiness or any weakness as a reaction on your body, Then consider Cryosolona not safe to drive or operate heavy machine after consumption. Meaning that, do not drive or operate heavy duty machines after taking the capsule if the capsule has a strange reaction on your body like dizziness, drowsiness. As prescribed by a pharmacist, it is dangerous to take alcohol while taking medicines as it exposed patients to drowsiness and health risk. Please take note of such effect most especially when taking Primosa capsule. It's advisable to consult your doctor on time for a proper recommendation and medical consultations. Is Cryosolona addictive or habit forming?Medicines are not designed with the mind of creating an addiction or abuse on the health of the users. Addictive Medicine is categorically called Controlled substances by the government. For instance, Schedule H or X in India and schedule II-V in the US are controlled substances.Please consult the medicine instruction manual on how to use and ensure it is not a controlled substance.In conclusion, self medication is a killer to your health. Consult your doctor for a proper prescription, recommendation, and guidiance. advertisement Review sDrugs.com conducted a study on Cryosolona, and the result of the survey is set out below. It is noteworthy that the product of the survey is based on the perception and impressions of the visitors of the website as well as the views of Cryosolona consumers. We, as a result of this, advice that you do not base your therapeutic or medical decisions on this result, but rather consult your certified medical experts for their recommendations. Visitor reports Visitor reviews There are no reviews yet. Be the first to write one! Your name: Email: Spam protection: < Type 6 here The information was verified by Dr. Arunabha Ray, MD Pharmacology Contact | About | Privacy Policy \u00a9 2002 - 2019 \"sDrugs.com\". All Rights Reserved", "Cryosols : permafrost-affected soils (Book, 2004) [WorldCat.org] Your Web browser is not enabled for JavaScript. Some features of WorldCat will not be available. Home WorldCat Home About WorldCat Help Search Search for Library Items Search for Lists Search for Contacts Search for a Library Create lists, bibliographies and reviews: or Search WorldCat Find items in libraries near you Advanced Search Find a Library Your list has reached the maximum number of items. Please create a new list with a new name; move some items to a new or existing list; or delete some items. Your request to send this item has been completed. Cite/Export Cite/Export Copy a citation APA (6th ed.) Chicago (Author-Date, 15th ed.) Harvard (18th ed.) MLA (7th ed.) Turabian (6th ed.) Export a citation Export to RefWorks Export to EndNote / Reference Manager Export to EasyBib Export to EndNote / Reference Manager(non-Latin) Cancel Note: Citations are based on reference standards. However, formatting rules can vary widely between applications and fields of interest or study. The specific requirements or preferences of your reviewing publisher, classroom teacher, institution or organization should be applied. Print E-mail E-mail All fields are required. The E-mail Address(es) field is required. Please enter recipient e-mail address(es). The E-mail Address(es) you entered is(are) not in a valid format. Please re-enter recipient e-mail address(es). You may send this item to up to five recipients. Enter recipient e-mail address(es): Separate up to five addresses with commas (,) The name field is required. Please enter your name. Enter your name: The subject field is required. Please enter the subject. Subject: The E-mail message field is required. Please enter the message. E-mail Message: I thought you might be interested in this item at http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/55514158 Title: Cryosols : permafrost-affected soils Author: J M Kimble Publisher: Berlin ; New York : Springer, \u00a92004. ISBN/ISSN: 3540207511 9783540207511 OCLC:55514158 Please verify that you are not a robot. Cancel Share Permalink Permalink Copy this URL to link to this page: Add a review Would you also like to submit a review for this item? Cancel Your list has reached the maximum number of items. Please create a new list with a new name; move some items to a new or existing list; or delete some items. You already recently rated this item. Your rating has been recorded Write a review Rate this item: 1 2 3 4 5 Preview this item Preview this item Checking... Cryosols : permafrost-affected soils Author: J M Kimble Publisher: Berlin ; New York : Springer, \u00a92004. Edition/Format: Print book : EnglishView all editions and formats Summary: This is the first book bring together the leading researchers in the area of permafrost soils to produce a review of the geography, cryogenic soil forming processes, ecological processes, classification and use of soils that are affected by permafrost. Read more... Rating: (not yet rated) 0 with reviews - Be the first. Subjects Frozen ground. Cryopedology. Sols gele\u0301s. View all subjects More like this Similar Items Find a copy online Links to this item Table of contents Add library to Favorites Please choose whether or not you want other users to be able to see on your profile that this library is a favorite of yours. Allow this favorite library to be seen by others Keep this favorite library private Save Cancel Find a copy in the library Finding libraries that hold this item... Details Genre/Form: Aufsatzsammlung Material Type: Internet resource Document Type: Book, Internet Resource All Authors / Contributors: J M Kimble Find more information about: J M Kimble ISBN: 3540207511 9783540207511 OCLC Number: 55514158 Description: xviii, 726 pages : illustrations ; 25 cm Contents: History of research of polar soil : introduction / S.V. Goryachkin -- Ch. 1. Soil research in arctic Alaska, Greenland, and Antarctica / J.C.F. Tedrow -- Ch. 2. history of research of Eurasian Cryosols / S.V. Goryachkin, N.A. Karavaeva and O.V. Makeev -- Ch. 3. Northern soil research in Canada / C. Tarnocai -- geography of Cryosols : introduction / C.A. Scott Smith and S.V. Goryachkin -- Ch. 1. Similarities and differences in arctic and antarctic soil zones / S.V. Goryachkin, H.P. Blume, L. Beyer, I. Campbell, G. Claridge, J.G. Bockheim, N.A. Karavaeva, V. Targulian and C. Tarnocai -- Ch. 2. Cryosols in Alaska / C.-L. Ping, M.H. Clark and D.K. Swanson -- Ch. 3. Cryosols of Arctic Canada / C. Tarnocai -- Ch. 4. Cryosols of the boreal, subarctic, and Western Cordilera regions of Canada / C.A.S. Smith and H. Veldhuis -- Ch. 5. Cryosols in the Russian Arctic Archipelagos / S.V. Goryachkin and N.A. Karavaeva -- Ch. 6. Soils and soil cover of Northeastern Eurasia / Ye. M. Naumov -- Ch. 7. Cryosols of the Russian European North / S.V. Goryachkin and I.V. Ignatenko -- Ch. 8. Cryosols of Western Siberia / N. Karavaeva -- Ch. 9. Cryosols of the mountains of Southern Siberia and far Eastern Russia / R.G. Gracheva -- Ch. 10. Geography and ecology of cryogenic soils of Mongolia / S.V. Maximovich -- Ch. 11. periglacial environment and distribution of Cryosols in China / C.-L. Ping, G. Qiu and L. Zhao -- Ch. 12. Cryosols of the arid Antarctic / I.B. Campbell and G.G.C. Claridge -- Ch. 13. soil cover of Central Siberia / I.A. Sokolov, T.V. Ananko and D. Ye Konyushkov -- Properties and processes of Cryosols : introduction / B. Van Vliet-Lanoe -- Ch. 1. Physico-chemical processes in Cryogenic soils / V. Ostroumov -- Ch. 2. Micromorphology of Cryosols / B. Van Vliet-Lanoe, C.A. Fox and S.V. Gubin. Ch. 3. thermal regime of Cryosols / C.R. Burn -- Ch. 4. Cryosols in the extremely arid transantarctic mountains region of Antarctica / I.B. Campbell and G.G.C. Claridge -- Ch. 5. Mineralogy and weathering of Antarctic Cryosols / H.-P. Blume, J. Chen, E. Kalk and D. Kuhn -- Ch. 6. Weathering processes in arid Cryosols / G.G.C. Claridge and I.B. Campbell -- Ecological processes of Cryosols : introduction / L. Beyer -- Ch. 1. Organic matter and bioactivity in Cryosols of Arctic Alaska / G.J. Michaelson, X.Y. Dai and C.-L. Ping -- Ch. 2. biological cycle in terrestrial polar ecosystems and its influence on soil formation / D.G. Zamolodchikov and D.G. Fedorov-Davydov -- Ch. 3. Soil organic matter storage in cold soils of coastal Eastern Antarctica (Casey Station, Wilkes Land) / L. Beyer, K. Pingpank, M. Bolter and R.D. Seppelt -- Ch. 4. Composition and transformation of soil organic matter in Cryosols and gelic histosols in coastal Eastern Antarctica (Casey Station, Wilkes Land) / L. Beyer, D.M. White, K. Pingpank and M. Bolter -- Ch. 5. Microorganisms and microbial processes in Antarctic soils / M. Bolter and E. Kandeler -- Ch. 6. biology of arid Cryosols / G.G.C. Claridge and I.B. Campbell -- Ch. 7. Biodiversity, primary productivity, and the seasonal dynamic of soil processes in Taimyr soil-permafrost complexes / V.D. Vassiljevskaja, B. Pospelova and V. Telesnina -- Classification of Cryosols : introduction / G. Broll and D. Ye. Konyushkov -- Ch. 1. Classification of Cryosols in Canada / C. Tarnocai -- Ch. 2. Classification of Cryosols in Russia / G. Mazhitova -- Ch. 3. gelisol order in soil taxonomy / R.J. Ahrens, J.G. Bockheim and C.-L. Ping -- Ch. 4. Classification of permafrost-affected soils in the WRB / C. Tarnocai, G. Broll and H.-P. Blume -- Management and use of Cryosols : introduction / I.B. Campbell. Ch. 1. Agricultural use of tundra soils in the Vorkuta area, Northeast European Russia / I. Archegova, N. Kotelina and G. Mazhitova -- Ch. 2. Disposal of mine tailings in continuous permafrost areas : environmental aspects and future control strategies / B. Elberling -- Ch. 3. Environmental impacts and recovery from human activities on Cryosols of the transantarctic mountains / I.B. Campbell and G.G.C. Claridge -- Ch. 4. Soil properties and relations in Cryosols of the region of the transantarctic mountains in Antarctica / I.B. Campbell and G.G.C. Claridge. Responsibility: John M. Kimble (ed.). More information: Table of contents Publisher description Reviews Editorial reviews Publisher Synopsis From the reviews:\"This book summarizes the results achieved by members of the Working Group and their associates, and is the first significant text dedicated to the soils. ... John Kimble, Charles Tarnocai, Sergey Goryachkin and other members of the Cryosol Group are to be heartily congratulated for the production of this book. It is the first authoritative and wide-ranging account of soils that occupy very large areas of the world's polar regions and are likely to have increasing ecological and environmental significance in the future.\" (J.A. Catt, European Journal of Soil Science, Vol. 56, 2005)\"Cryosols compiles decades of work by scholars, researchers, and field soil practitioners on soils and their management in the permafrost regions of the world. ... Figures and tables are timely and easily interpreted. Each chapter has its own reference list covering many years of peer-reviewed international journals and books ... . Cryosols is a valuable reference for soil scientists, ecologists, biologists, agronomists, foresters, and conservationists interested in the permafrost region. Summing Up: Recommended. Upper-level undergraduates and above.\" (S.G. Shetron, CHOICE, Vol. 42 (5), January, 2005)\"This volume is an impressive undertaking that summarizes the current state of knowledge concerning the soils of cold regions. ... This book will be of interest for three main reasons. First, it is the only major volume that brings together studies upon cold-climate soils ... . Second, it attempts the difficult task of integrating the different approaches adopted by soil scientists in Russia, Europe and North America. Third, it brings cryosols to the attention of the wider scientific community.\" (Hugh French, Progress in Physical Geography, Vol. 30 (1), 2006) Read more... User-contributed reviews Add a review and share your thoughts with other readers. Be the first. Add a review and share your thoughts with other readers. Be the first. Tags Add tags\u00a0for\u00a0\"Cryosols : permafrost-affected soils\". Be the first. Similar Items Related Subjects:(8) Frozen ground. Cryopedology. Sols gele\u0301s. Cryope\u0301dologie. Bodemgesteldheid. Permafrost. Bodennutzung Dauerfrostboden Confirm this request You may have already requested this item. Please select Ok if you would like to proceed with this request anyway. Linked Data More info about Linked Data Primary Entity<http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/55514158> # Cryosols : permafrost-affected soils\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:CreativeWork, schema:Book ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0library:oclcnum \"55514158\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0library:placeOfPublication <http://id.loc.gov/vocabulary/countries/gw> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0library:placeOfPublication <http://dbpedia.org/resource/New_York_City> ; # New York\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0library:placeOfPublication <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/898842688#Place/berlin> ; # Berlin\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/898842688#Topic/cryopedologie> ; # Cryop\u00e9dologie\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/898842688#Topic/bodennutzung> ; # Bodennutzung\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/898842688#Topic/bodemgesteldheid> ; # Bodemgesteldheid\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/898842688#Topic/sols_geles> ; # Sols gel\u00e9s\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/898842688#Topic/permafrost> ; # Permafrost\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/898842688#Topic/dauerfrostboden> ; # Dauerfrostboden\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://dewey.info/class/551.384/e22/> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://id.worldcat.org/fast/884503> ; # Cryopedology\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://id.worldcat.org/fast/935479> ; # Frozen ground\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:bookFormat bgn:PrintBook ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:contributor <http://viaf.org/viaf/54374809> ; # John M. Kimble\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:copyrightYear \"2004\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:datePublished \"2004\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:exampleOfWork <http://worldcat.org/entity/work/id/898842688> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:genre \"Aufsatzsammlung\"@en ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:inLanguage \"en\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Cryosols : permafrost-affected soils\"@en ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:productID \"55514158\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:publication <http://www.worldcat.org/title/-/oclc/55514158#PublicationEvent/berlin_new_york_springer_2004> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:publisher <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/898842688#Agent/springer> ; # Springer\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:url <http://catdir.loc.gov/catdir/enhancements/fy0813/2004103664-t.html> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:url <http://bvbr.bib-bvb.de:8991/F?func=service&doc;_library=BVB01&local;_base=BVB01&doc;_number=012826471&line;_number=0001&func;_code=DB_RECORDS&service;_type=MEDIA> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:workExample <http://worldcat.org/isbn/9783540207511> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0umbel:isLike <http://d-nb.info/969441622> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0wdrs:describedby <http://www.worldcat.org/title/-/oclc/55514158> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.Related Entities<http://dbpedia.org/resource/New_York_City> # New York\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Place ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"New York\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://dewey.info/class/551.384/e22/>\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Intangible ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/898842688#Agent/springer> # Springer\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a bgn:Agent ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Springer\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/898842688#Place/berlin> # Berlin\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Place ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Berlin\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/898842688#Topic/bodemgesteldheid> # Bodemgesteldheid\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Intangible ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Bodemgesteldheid\"@en ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/898842688#Topic/bodennutzung> # Bodennutzung\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Intangible ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Bodennutzung\"@en ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/898842688#Topic/cryopedologie> # Cryop\u00e9dologie\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Intangible ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Cryop\u00e9dologie\"@fr ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/898842688#Topic/dauerfrostboden> # Dauerfrostboden\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Intangible ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Dauerfrostboden\"@en ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/898842688#Topic/permafrost> # Permafrost\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Intangible ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Permafrost\"@en ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/898842688#Topic/sols_geles> # Sols gel\u00e9s\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Intangible ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Sols gel\u00e9s\"@fr ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://id.loc.gov/vocabulary/countries/gw>\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Place ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0dcterms:identifier \"gw\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://id.worldcat.org/fast/884503> # Cryopedology\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Intangible ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Cryopedology\"@en ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://id.worldcat.org/fast/935479> # Frozen ground\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Intangible ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Frozen ground\"@en ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://viaf.org/viaf/54374809> # John M. Kimble\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Person ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:familyName \"Kimble\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:givenName \"John M.\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:givenName \"J. M.\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"John M. Kimble\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://worldcat.org/isbn/9783540207511>\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:ProductModel ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:isbn \"3540207511\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:isbn \"9783540207511\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://www.worldcat.org/title/-/oclc/55514158>\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a genont:InformationResource, genont:ContentTypeGenericResource ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/55514158> ; # Cryosols : permafrost-affected soils\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:dateModified \"2018-11-12\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0void:inDataset <http://purl.oclc.org/dataset/WorldCat> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://www.worldcat.org/title/-/oclc/55514158#PublicationEvent/berlin_new_york_springer_2004>\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:PublicationEvent ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:location <http://dbpedia.org/resource/New_York_City> ; # New York\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:location <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/898842688#Place/berlin> ; # Berlin\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:organizer <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/898842688#Agent/springer> ; # Springer\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.Content-negotiable representationsTurtle (text/turtle)JSON-LD (application/ld+json)RDF/XML (application/rdf+xml)N-TRIPLES (text/plain)HTML+RDFa (text/html) Languages: \u010cesky \u00a0|\u00a0 Deutsch \u00a0|\u00a0 English \u00a0|\u00a0 Espa\u00f1ol \u00a0|\u00a0 Fran\u00e7ais \u00a0|\u00a0 Italiano \u00a0|\u00a0 Nederlands \u00a0|\u00a0 Portugu\u00eas \u00a0|\u00a0 \u0e20\u0e32\u0e29\u0e32\u0e44\u0e17\u0e22 \u00a0|\u00a0 \ud55c\uad6d\uc5b4 \u00a0|\u00a0 \u65e5\u672c\u8a9e \u00a0|\u00a0 \u4e2d\u6587(\u7e41\u9ad4) \u00a0|\u00a0 \u4e2d\u6587(\u7b80\u4f53) You: Sign In | Register | My WorldCat | My Lists | My Watchlist | My Reviews | My Tags | My Saved Searches WorldCat: Home | About | Help | Search Legal: Copyright \u00a9 2001-2019 OCLC. All rights reserved. | Privacy Policy | Terms and Conditions WorldCat is the world's largest library catalog, helping you find library materials online. Learn more \u203a\u203a Follow WorldCat: Please sign in to WorldCat\u00a0Don't have an account? You can easily\u00a0create a free account. User Name: Password: Remember me on this computer Cancel Forgot your password?", "CryoStor\u00ae cell cryopreservation media CS10 | Sigma-Aldrich ADVANCED SEARCH STRUCTURE SEARCH CERT OF ANALYSIS SDS SEARCH Sigma-Aldrich \u00ae VIEW ALL SEARCH RESULTS Type in Product Names, Product Numbers, or CAS Numbers to see suggestions. Products ANALYTICAL / CHROMATOGRAPHY \u00bb Standards & Reference Materials Gas Chromatography HPLC & UHPLC LC-MS LPLC, TLC & Paper Chromatography Mobile Laboratory Spectroscopy Sample Prep & Purification Titration & Karl Fischer CHEMISTRY \u00bb Acids & Bases Catalysis & Inorganics Chemical Synthesis Chemistry Libraries Heterocyclic Building Blocks Organic Building Blocks Organometallics Salts Solvents Stable Isotopes NEW PRODUCTS \u00bb LIFE SCIENCE \u00bb Antibodies Biochemicals & Reagents Biological Buffers Cell Biology Cell Culture CRISPR Enzymes, Inhibitors & Substrates Histology & Hematology Microbiology Molecular Biology Open Reading Frame (ORF) PCR & Amplification Peptide Information RNAi Synthetic Biology ZFN MATERIALS SCIENCE \u00bb Organic & Printed Electronics Metal & Ceramic Science Micro/Nano Electronics Polymer Science GREEN ALTERNATIVES \u00bb OLIGOS & qPCR PROBES \u00bb Order Now Custom DNA Oligos SYBR\u00ae Green Primers Custom qPCR Probes Predesigned Probes Custom & Predesigned siRNA SERVICES \u00bb SAFC Production Materials LABWARE \u00bb Corning Aldrich GE Life Sciences EMD Millipore Water Purification Systems Service SERVICES OFFERED \u00bb Basic Research Product & Process Development Manufacturing & Production Regulatory Compliance Facility Operations CUSTOM CAPABILITIES \u00bb Small Molecule Manufacturing Large Molecule Manufacturing Drug & Process Development Genomic Solutions Analytical / Chromatography Production Materials Industries Academic Research Agriculture Biopharmaceuticals Biotechnology Chemical R&D; Clinical Diagnostics Cosmetics & Personal Care Diagnostic Manufacturing Environmental & IH Flavors & Fragrances Food & Beverage Forensic Testing Medical Materials Pharma Drug Screening Pharma Manufacturing Pharma Oncology Pharma QC Production Materials SDS Certificates Customer Support Technical Service Quality Management Web Help Web Toolbox Worldwide Offices USA Home C2874 - CryoStor\u00ae cell cryopreservation media EMAIL THIS PAGE TO A FRIEND To Email: From Email: Message: Pricing & availability is not currently available. Questions? Contact Technical Service C2874 Sigma-Aldrich CryoStor\u00ae cell cryopreservation media CS10 SDS Bulletin (PDF)Specification Sheet (PDF) Similar Products Purchase Safety & Documentation Protocols & Articles Peer-Reviewed Papers Related Products Purchase Properties Related Categories Cell Culture, Cell Freezing Media, Cell Freezing Media and Reagents, Reagents and Supplements sterility sterile-filtered storage temp. 2-8\u00b0C Description Application CryoStor, a series of cell-specific, optimized preservation media, is uniquely formulated to address the molecularbiological aspects of cells during the cryopreservation process thereby directly reducing the level of Cryopreservation-Induced Delayed-Onset Cell Death and improving post-thaw cell viability and function. CryoStor\u00ae CS10 is a uniquely formulated cryopreservation medium containing 10% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). Recommended for the preservation of hepatocytes, tissue samples and other extremely sensitive cell types. Cryostor Cryopreservation Video Protocol Other Notes Formulation contains 10% DMSO. General description The CryoStor CS2, CS5, and CS10 family of preservation solutions represents the next generation of cryopreservation media. Designed to prepare and preserve cells in ultra low temperature environments (\u201380 to \u2013196 \u00b0C), CryoStor media provide a safe, protective environment for cells and tissues during thefreezing, storage, and thawing process. Through modulating the cellular biochemical response to the cryopreservation process, these media provide enhanced cell viability and functionality, while eliminating the need to include serum, proteins, or high levels of cytotoxic agents.CryoStor CS2, CS5, and CS10 are a series of cell specific, optimized preservation media, uniquely formulated to address the molecular biological aspects of cells during the cryopreservation process; thereby, directly reducing the level of Cryopreservation-Induced Delayed-Onset Cell Death and improving post-thaw cell viability and function.These media are recommended for the preservation of stem cells, hepatocytes, tissue samples, and other extremely sensitive cell types Legal Information CryoStor is a registered trademark of BioLife Solutions, Inc. Safety & Documentation Safety Information RIDADR NONH for all modes of transport WGK Germany 3 Documents Certificate of Analysis Certificate of Origin Bulk Quote-Order Product SDS Specification Sheet C2874 - Bulletin (74KB) Protocols & Articles Related Content Cell Culture Freezing Tips Are you following best practices for cryostorage? We have cool tips for protecting your cells.Keywords: Cell culture Cell Culture Troubleshooting Guide Cell culture has become one of the most fundamental techniques for modeling biological systems, and is of increasing importance in the biotechnology and pharmaceutical sectors as well as an essential...Keywords: Antibiotics, Apoptosis, Cell attachment, Cell culture, Cryopreservation, Filtration, Growth factors, Pharmaceutical, Phase transitions CryoStor\u00ae Cryopreservation Protocol [VIDEO] Cryopreservation efficacy - which includes post-thaw recovery, viability, and functionality is of importance to both research and clinical applications. The cumulative stresses that result from the c...Keywords: Apoptosis, Clinical, Cryopreservation, Cytotoxins, Genetic, Phase transitions Peer-Reviewed Papers 15 References Related Products comparable product Product # Description Add to Cart C3124 CryoStor\u00ae cell cryopreservation media, CS2 pricing C2999 CryoStor\u00ae cell cryopreservation media, CS5 pricing related product Product # Description Add to Cart 08168 Timestrip Plus\u2122 8 \u00b0C pricing Technical Service: Our team of scientists has experience in all areas of research including Life Science, Material Science, Chemical Synthesis, Chromatography, Analytical and many others. Contact Technical Service Bulk Ordering & Pricing: Need larger quantities for your development, manufacturing or research applications? Bulk Ordering & Pricing", "Cryosols - Permafrost-Affected Soils | John Kimble | Springer Search Menu Loading.. Your cart is empty. ...you'll find more products in the shopping cart. Total\u20ac239.99 View cart Login Manage Account My Bookshelf Manage Alerts Article Tracking Book Tracking Login America Change Home Subjects Astronomy Behavioral Sciences Biomedical Sciences Business & Management Chemistry Climate Computer Science Earth Sciences Economics Education & Language Energy Engineering Environmental Sciences Food Science & Nutrition Geography Law Life Sciences Materials Mathematics Medicine Philosophy Physics Popular Science Public Health Social Sciences Statistics Water Services Advertisers Authors & Editors Booksellers Book Reviewers Instructors Journalists Librarians (Springer Nature) Rights & Permissions Societies & Publishing Partners Subscription Agencies (Springer Nature) Help & Contact Open Access & Springer Springer Shop About us Get 40% off Law, Criminology & Psychology books or $/\u20ac/\u00a330 off Medicine & Public Health eBooks! Environmental Sciences Soil Science Free Preview \u00a9 2004 Cryosols Permafrost-Affected Soils Editors: Kimble, John (Ed.) Free Preview Buy this book eBook $259.00 price for USA in USD (gross) Buy eBook ISBN 978-3-662-06429-0 Digitally watermarked, DRM-free Included format: PDF ebooks can be used on all reading devices Immediate eBook download after purchase Hardcover $349.99 price for USA in USD Buy Hardcover ISBN 978-3-540-20751-1 Free shipping for individuals worldwide Usually dispatched within 3 to 5 business days. Softcover $329.99 price for USA in USD Buy Softcover ISBN 978-3-642-05856-1 Free shipping for individuals worldwide Usually dispatched within 3 to 5 business days. FAQ Policy About this book Cryosols occupy a unique part of the earth and have properties greatly different from other soils. They\u00a0also occur where the greatest impact of global warming is predicted. They have been studied extensively in Russia, Canada and in other regions.\u00a0This is, however,\u00a0the first book\u00a0which brings\u00a0together experts from all\u00a0fields\u00a0in order\u00a0to focus on these unique soils. It will undoubtedly provide one of the best sources of information available\u00a0about these soils. Show all Reviews From the reviews: \"This book summarizes the results achieved by members of the Working Group and their associates, and is the first significant text dedicated to the soils. \u2026 John Kimble, Charles Tarnocai, Sergey Goryachkin and other members of the Cryosol Group are to be heartily congratulated for the production of this book. It is the first authoritative and wide-ranging account of soils that occupy very large areas of the world\u2019s polar regions and are likely to have increasing ecological and environmental significance in the future.\" (J.A. Catt, European Journal of Soil Science, Vol. 56, 2005) \"Cryosols compiles decades of work by scholars, researchers, and field soil practitioners on soils and their management in the permafrost regions of the world. \u2026 Figures and tables are timely and easily interpreted. Each chapter has its own reference list covering many years of peer-reviewed international journals and books \u2026 . Cryosols is a valuable reference for soil scientists, ecologists, biologists, agronomists, foresters, and conservationists interested in the permafrost region. Summing Up: Recommended. Upper-level undergraduates and above.\" (S.G. Shetron, CHOICE, Vol. 42 (5), January, 2005) \"This volume is an impressive undertaking that summarizes the current state of knowledge concerning the soils of cold regions. \u2026 This book will be of interest for three main reasons. First, it is the only major volume that brings together studies upon cold-climate soils \u2026 . Second, it attempts the difficult task of integrating the different approaches adopted by soil scientists in Russia, Europe and North America. Third, it brings cryosols to the attention of the wider scientific community.\" (Hugh French, Progress in Physical Geography, Vol. 30 (1), 2006) Show all Table of contents (37 chapters) Table of contents (37 chapters) Soil Research in Arctic Alaska, Greenland, and Antarctica Tedrow, J. C. F. Pages 5-16 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 The History of Research of Eurasian Cryosols Goryachkin, S. V. (et al.) Pages 17-28 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Northern Soil Research in Canada Tarnocai, Charles Pages 29-43 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Similarities and Differences in Arctic and Antarctic Soil Zones Goryachkin, S. V. (et al.) Pages 49-70 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Cryosols in Alaska Ping, Chien-Lu (et al.) Pages 71-94 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Cryosols of Arctic Canada Tarnocai, Charles Pages 95-117 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Cryosols of the Boreal, Subarctic, and Western Cordillera Regions of Canada Smith, C. A. Scott (et al.) Pages 119-137 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Cryosols in the Russian Arctic Archipelagos Goryachkin, S. V. (et al.) Pages 139-160 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Soils and Soil Cover of Northeastern Eurasia Naumov, Ye. M. Pages 161-183 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Cryosols of the Russian European North Goryachkin, S. V. (et al.) Pages 185-207 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Cryosols of Western Siberia Karavaeva, N. A. Pages 209-229 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Cryosols of the Mountains of Southern Siberia and Far Eastern Russia Gracheva, Raissa G. Pages 231-252 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Geography and Ecology of Cryogenic Soils of Mongolia Maximovich, Stanislav V. Pages 253-274 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 The Periglacial Environment and Distribution of Cryosols in China Ping, Chien-Lu (et al.) Pages 275-290 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Cryosols of the Arid Antarctic Campbell, I. B. (et al.) Pages 291-302 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 The Soil Cover of Central Siberia Sokolov, I. A. (et al.) Pages 303-338 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Physico-Chemical Processes in Cryogenic Soils Ostroumov, V. Pages 347-364 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Micromorphology of Cryosols Vliet-Lano\u00eb, Brigitte (et al.) Pages 365-390 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 The Thermal Regime of Cryosols Burn, C. R. Pages 391-413 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Cryosols in the Extremely Arid Transantarctic Mountains Region of Antarctica Campbell, I. B. (et al.) Pages 415-426 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Mineralogy and Weathering of Antarctic Cryosols Blume, H.-P. (et al.) Pages 427-445 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Weathering Processes in Arid Cryosols Claridge, G. G. C. (et al.) Pages 447-458 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Organic Matter and Bioactivity in Cryosols of Arctic Alaska Michaelson, G. J. (et al.) Pages 463-477 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 The Biological Cycle in Terrestrial Polar Ecosystems and Its Influence on Soil Formation Zamolodchikov, D. G. (et al.) Pages 479-508 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Soil Organic Matter Storage in Cold Soils of Coastal Eastern Antarctica (Casey Station, Wilkes Land) Beyer, Lothar (et al.) Pages 509-524 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Composition and Transformation of Soil Organic Matter in Cryosols and Gelic Histosols in Coastal Eastern Antarctica (Casey Station, Wilkes Land) Beyer, Lothar (et al.) Pages 525-556 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Microorganisms and Microbial Processes in Antarctic Soils B\u00f6lter, Manfred (et al.) Pages 557-572 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 The Biology of Arid Cryosols Claridge, G. G. C. (et al.) Pages 573-580 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Biodiversity, primary productivity, and the seasonal dynamic of soil processes in Taimyr soil-permafrost complexes Vassiljevskaja, V. D. (et al.) Pages 581-594 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Classification of Cryosols in Canada Tarnocai, Charles Pages 599-610 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Classification of Cryosols in Russia Mazhitova, Galena Pages 611-626 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 The Gelisol Order in Soil Taxonomy Ahrens, R. J. (et al.) Pages 627-635 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Classification of Permafrost-Affected Soils in the WRB Tarnocai, C. (et al.) Pages 637-656 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Agricultural Use of Tundra Soils in the Vorkuta Area, Northeast European Russia Archegova, I. (et al.) Pages 661-676 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Disposal of Mine Tailings in Continuous Permafrost Areas: Environmental Aspects and Future Control Strategies Elberling, B. Pages 677-698 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Environmental Impacts and Recovery from Human Activities on Cryosols of the Transantarctic Mountains Campbell, I. B. (et al.) Pages 699-711 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Soil Properties and Relationships in Cryosols of the Region of the Transantarctic Mountains in Antarctica Campbell, I. B. (et al.) Pages 713-726 Preview Buy Chapter $29.95 Show next xx Read this book on SpringerLink Download Sample pages 1 PDF (671.9 KB) Download Table of contents PDF (532.2 KB) Buy this book eBook $259.00 price for USA in USD (gross) Buy eBook ISBN 978-3-662-06429-0 Digitally watermarked, DRM-free Included format: PDF ebooks can be used on all reading devices Immediate eBook download after purchase Hardcover $349.99 price for USA in USD Buy Hardcover ISBN 978-3-540-20751-1 Free shipping for individuals worldwide Usually dispatched within 3 to 5 business days. Softcover $329.99 price for USA in USD Buy Softcover ISBN 978-3-642-05856-1 Free shipping for individuals worldwide Usually dispatched within 3 to 5 business days. FAQ Policy Services for this Book Download Product Flyer Download High-Resolution Cover Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Google++ Recommended for you Bibliographic Information Bibliographic Information Book Title Cryosols Book Subtitle Permafrost-Affected Soils Editors John Kimble Copyright 2004 Publisher Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg Copyright Holder Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg eBook ISBN 978-3-662-06429-0 DOI 10.1007/978-3-662-06429-0 Hardcover ISBN 978-3-540-20751-1 Softcover ISBN 978-3-642-05856-1 Edition Number 1 Number of Pages XVIII, 726 Topics Soil Science & Conservation CLOSE PAGE 1 PAGE 2 My Account Shopping CartMySpringerLoginSpringerAlerts About Springer HistoryMediaComplianceCareersAffiliate Program Help & Contact Help OverviewOrder FAQContact UsImprint Legal \u00a9 2019 Springer Nature Switzerland AG. Springer is part of Springer Nature Privacy PolicyGeneral Terms & Conditions Springer JavaScript is currently disabled, this site works much better if you enable JavaScript in your browser.", "Cryopedology (eBook, 2015) [WorldCat.org] Your Web browser is not enabled for JavaScript. Some features of WorldCat will not be available. Home WorldCat Home About WorldCat Help Search Search for Library Items Search for Lists Search for Contacts Search for a Library Create lists, bibliographies and reviews: or Search WorldCat Find items in libraries near you Advanced Search Find a Library Your list has reached the maximum number of items. Please create a new list with a new name; move some items to a new or existing list; or delete some items. Your request to send this item has been completed. Cite/Export Cite/Export Copy a citation APA (6th ed.) Chicago (Author-Date, 15th ed.) Harvard (18th ed.) MLA (7th ed.) Turabian (6th ed.) Export a citation Export to RefWorks Export to EndNote / Reference Manager Export to EasyBib Export to EndNote / Reference Manager(non-Latin) Cancel Note: Citations are based on reference standards. However, formatting rules can vary widely between applications and fields of interest or study. The specific requirements or preferences of your reviewing publisher, classroom teacher, institution or organization should be applied. Print E-mail E-mail All fields are required. The E-mail Address(es) field is required. Please enter recipient e-mail address(es). The E-mail Address(es) you entered is(are) not in a valid format. Please re-enter recipient e-mail address(es). You may send this item to up to five recipients. Enter recipient e-mail address(es): Separate up to five addresses with commas (,) The name field is required. Please enter your name. Enter your name: The subject field is required. Please enter the subject. Subject: The E-mail message field is required. Please enter the message. E-mail Message: I thought you might be interested in this item at http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/894508400 Title: Cryopedology Author: James G Bockheim Publisher: Cham : Springer, [2015] \u00a92015 ISBN/ISSN: 9783319084855 3319084852 OCLC:894508400 Please verify that you are not a robot. Cancel Share Permalink Permalink Copy this URL to link to this page: Add a review Would you also like to submit a review for this item? Cancel Your list has reached the maximum number of items. Please create a new list with a new name; move some items to a new or existing list; or delete some items. You already recently rated this item. Your rating has been recorded Write a review Rate this item: 1 2 3 4 5 Preview this item Preview this item Checking... Cryopedology Author: James G Bockheim Publisher: Cham : Springer, [2015] \u00a92015 Series: Progress in soil science. Edition/Format: eBook : Document : EnglishView all editions and formats Summary: This is the first book solely devoted to Cryopedology, the study of soils of cold regions. The analysis treats Cryosols as a three-part system (active layer, transition layer, permafrost). The book considers soil-forming factors, cryogenic processes, and classification and distribution of Cryosols. Cryosols of the Arctic, Antarctica, and the high mountains are considered in detail. The chapters address cryosols and earth-system science, cryosols in a changing climate, cryosols databases and their use, and management of cryosols. The book is rich in color photographs and highlights the author's 43 field trips to Antarctica, the Arctic, and alpine areas. Read more... Rating: (not yet rated) 0 with reviews - Be the first. Subjects Cryopedology. SCIENCE -- Earth Sciences -- Geography. SCIENCE -- Earth Sciences -- Geology. View all subjects More like this Similar Items Find a copy online Links to this item Ebook Library ebrary EBSCOhost MyiLibrary ProQuest Ebook Central SpringerLink SpringerLink SpringerLink SpringerLink SpringerLink 0-link-springer-com.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk Connect to Springer e-book Show all links Add library to Favorites Please choose whether or not you want other users to be able to see on your profile that this library is a favorite of yours. Allow this favorite library to be seen by others Keep this favorite library private Save Cancel Find a copy in the library Finding libraries that hold this item... Details Genre/Form: Electronic books Additional Physical Format: Print version:Bockheim, James G.Cryopedology.Cham : Springer, 2015(DLC) 2014952316(OCoLC)903051796 Material Type: Document, Internet resource Document Type: Internet Resource, Computer File All Authors / Contributors: James G Bockheim Find more information about: James G Bockheim ISBN: 9783319084855 3319084852 OCLC Number: 894508400 Description: 1 online resource (xii, 177 pages) : illustrations, maps. Contents: 1. Introduction -- 2. Cryosols as a three-part system -- 3. Description, sampling, and analysis of Cryosols -- 4. Factors of cryosol formation -- 5. Cryogenic soil processes -- 6. Classification of cryosols -- 7. Distribution of cryosols -- 8. Cryosols of the circumarctic region -- 9. Cryosols of Antarctica -- 10. Alpine cryosols -- 11. Cryosols and earth-system sciences -- 12. Cryosols in a changing climate -- 13. Management of cryosols -- 14. Cryosol databases. Series Title: Progress in soil science. Responsibility: James G. Bockheim. Abstract: The book considers soil-forming factors, cryogenic processes, and classification and distribution of Cryosols. Cryosols of the Arctic, Antarctica, and the high mountains are considered in detail. The chapters address cryosols and earth-system science, cryosols in a changing climate, cryosols databases and their use, and management of cryosols. Read more... Reviews User-contributed reviews Add a review and share your thoughts with other readers. Be the first. Add a review and share your thoughts with other readers. Be the first. Tags Add tags\u00a0for\u00a0\"Cryopedology\". Be the first. Similar Items Related Subjects:(6) Cryopedology. SCIENCE -- Earth Sciences -- Geography. SCIENCE -- Earth Sciences -- Geology. Soil science, sedimentology. Physical geography & topography. Earth sciences. Confirm this request You may have already requested this item. Please select Ok if you would like to proceed with this request anyway. Linked Data More info about Linked Data Primary Entity <http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/894508400> # Cryopedology a schema:CreativeWork, schema:Book, schema:MediaObject ; library:oclcnum \"894508400\" ; library:placeOfPublication <http://id.loc.gov/vocabulary/countries/sz> ; schema:about <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/2233524621#Topic/cryopedology> ; # Cryopedology schema:about <http://dewey.info/class/551.38/e23/> ; schema:about <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/2233524621#Topic/physical_geography_&_topography> ; # Physical geography & topography schema:about <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/2233524621#Topic/science_earth_sciences_geology> ; # SCIENCE--Earth Sciences--Geology schema:about <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/2233524621#Topic/earth_sciences> ; # Earth sciences schema:about <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/2233524621#Topic/science_earth_sciences_geography> ; # SCIENCE--Earth Sciences--Geography schema:about <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/2233524621#Topic/soil_science_sedimentology> ; # Soil science, sedimentology schema:author <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/2233524621#Person/bockheim_james_g> ; # James G. Bockheim schema:bookFormat schema:EBook ; schema:copyrightYear \"2015\" ; schema:datePublished \"2015\" ; schema:description \"1. Introduction -- 2. Cryosols as a three-part system -- 3. Description, sampling, and analysis of Cryosols -- 4. Factors of cryosol formation -- 5. Cryogenic soil processes -- 6. Classification of cryosols -- 7. Distribution of cryosols -- 8. Cryosols of the circumarctic region -- 9. Cryosols of Antarctica -- 10. Alpine cryosols -- 11. Cryosols and earth-system sciences -- 12. Cryosols in a changing climate -- 13. Management of cryosols -- 14. Cryosol databases.\"@en ; schema:description \"This is the first book solely devoted to Cryopedology, the study of soils of cold regions. The analysis treats Cryosols as a three-part system (active layer, transition layer, permafrost). The book considers soil-forming factors, cryogenic processes, and classification and distribution of Cryosols. Cryosols of the Arctic, Antarctica, and the high mountains are considered in detail. The chapters address cryosols and earth-system science, cryosols in a changing climate, cryosols databases and their use, and management of cryosols. The book is rich in color photographs and highlights the author's 43 field trips to Antarctica, the Arctic, and alpine areas.\"@en ; schema:exampleOfWork <http://worldcat.org/entity/work/id/2233524621> ; schema:genre \"Electronic books\"@en ; schema:inLanguage \"en\" ; schema:isPartOf <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/2233524621#Series/progress_in_soil_science> ; # Progress in soil science. schema:isSimilarTo <http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/903051796> ; schema:name \"Cryopedology\"@en ; schema:productID \"894508400\" ; schema:url <https://link.springer.com/openurl?genre=book&isbn;=978-3-319-08484-8> ; schema:url <http://public.eblib.com/choice/publicfullrecord.aspx?p=1968454> ; schema:url <http://search.ebscohost.com/login.aspx?direct=true&scope;=site&db;=nlebk&db;=nlabk&AN;=870071> ; schema:url <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-08485-5> ; schema:url <http://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-08485-5> ; schema:url <https://login.libproxy.uregina.ca:8443/login?url=https://link.springer.com/openurl?genre=book&isbn;=978-3-319-08484-8> ; schema:url <http://public.ebookcentral.proquest.com/choice/publicfullrecord.aspx?p=1968454> ; schema:url <http://www.myilibrary.com?id=789894> ; schema:url <https://0-link-springer-com.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/book/10.1007/978-3-319-08485-5> ; schema:url <http://site.ebrary.com/id/10954779> ; schema:url <https://link.springer.com/10.1007/978-3-319-08485-5> ; schema:workExample <http://worldcat.org/isbn/9783319084855> ; schema:workExample <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-08485-5> ; umbel:isLike <http://bnb.data.bl.uk/id/resource/GBB8N1697> ; wdrs:describedby <http://www.worldcat.org/title/-/oclc/894508400> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0. Related Entities <http://dewey.info/class/551.38/e23/>\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Intangible ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0. <http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-08485-5>\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:IndividualProduct ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0. <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/2233524621#Person/bockheim_james_g> # James G. Bockheim a schema:Person ; schema:familyName \"Bockheim\" ; schema:givenName \"James G.\" ; schema:name \"James G. Bockheim\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0. <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/2233524621#Series/progress_in_soil_science> # Progress in soil science. a bgn:PublicationSeries ; schema:hasPart <http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/894508400> ; # Cryopedology schema:name \"Progress in soil science.\" ; schema:name \"Progress in soil science\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0. <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/2233524621#Topic/cryopedology> # Cryopedology a schema:Intangible ; schema:name \"Cryopedology\"@en ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0. <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/2233524621#Topic/earth_sciences> # Earth sciences a schema:Intangible ; schema:name \"Earth sciences\"@en ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0. <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/2233524621#Topic/physical_geography_&_topography> # Physical geography & topography a schema:Intangible ; schema:name \"Physical geography & topography\"@en ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0. <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/2233524621#Topic/science_earth_sciences_geography> # SCIENCE--Earth Sciences--Geography a schema:Intangible ; schema:name \"SCIENCE--Earth Sciences--Geography\"@en ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0. <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/2233524621#Topic/science_earth_sciences_geology> # SCIENCE--Earth Sciences--Geology a schema:Intangible ; schema:name \"SCIENCE--Earth Sciences--Geology\"@en ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0. <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/2233524621#Topic/soil_science_sedimentology> # Soil science, sedimentology a schema:Intangible ; schema:name \"Soil science, sedimentology\"@en ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0. <http://id.loc.gov/vocabulary/countries/sz>\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Place ; dcterms:identifier \"sz\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0. <http://worldcat.org/isbn/9783319084855>\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:ProductModel ; schema:isbn \"3319084852\" ; schema:isbn \"9783319084855\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0. <http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/903051796>\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:CreativeWork ; rdfs:label \"Cryopedology.\" ; schema:description \"Print version:\" ; schema:isSimilarTo <http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/894508400> ; # Cryopedology . <http://www.worldcat.org/title/-/oclc/894508400>\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a genont:InformationResource, genont:ContentTypeGenericResource ; schema:about <http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/894508400> ; # Cryopedology schema:dateModified \"2019-02-10\" ; void:inDataset <http://purl.oclc.org/dataset/WorldCat> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0. <https://0-link-springer-com.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/book/10.1007/978-3-319-08485-5> rdfs:comment \"Connect to Springer e-book\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0. Content-negotiable representations Turtle (text/turtle) JSON-LD (application/ld+json) RDF/XML (application/rdf+xml) N-TRIPLES (text/plain) HTML+RDFa (text/html) Languages: \u010cesky \u00a0|\u00a0 Deutsch \u00a0|\u00a0 English \u00a0|\u00a0 Espa\u00f1ol \u00a0|\u00a0 Fran\u00e7ais \u00a0|\u00a0 Italiano \u00a0|\u00a0 Nederlands \u00a0|\u00a0 Portugu\u00eas \u00a0|\u00a0 \u0e20\u0e32\u0e29\u0e32\u0e44\u0e17\u0e22 \u00a0|\u00a0 \ud55c\uad6d\uc5b4 \u00a0|\u00a0 \u65e5\u672c\u8a9e \u00a0|\u00a0 \u4e2d\u6587(\u7e41\u9ad4) \u00a0|\u00a0 \u4e2d\u6587(\u7b80\u4f53) You: Sign In | Register | My WorldCat | My Lists | My Watchlist | My Reviews | My Tags | My Saved Searches WorldCat: Home | About | Help | Search Legal: Copyright \u00a9 2001-2019 OCLC. All rights reserved. | Privacy Policy | Terms and Conditions WorldCat is the world's largest library catalog, helping you find library materials online. Learn more \u203a\u203a Follow WorldCat: Please sign in to WorldCat\u00a0Don't have an account? You can easily\u00a0create a free account. User Name: Password: Remember me on this computer Cancel Forgot your password?", "cryosols - Wiktionary cryosols Definition from Wiktionary, the free dictionary Jump to navigation Jump to search English[edit] Noun[edit] cryosols plural of cryosol Retrieved from \"https://en.wiktionary.org/w/index.php?title=cryosols&oldid=34018805\" Categories: English non-lemma formsEnglish noun plural forms Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces EntryDiscussion Variants Views ReadEditHistory More Search Navigation Main PageCommunity portalPreferencesRequested entriesRecent changesRandom entryHelpGlossaryDonationsContact us Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this page In other languages Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version This page was last edited on 18 August 2015, at 17:40. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Privacy policy About\u00a0Wiktionary Disclaimers Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "cryosol - Wiktionary cryosol Definition from Wiktionary, the free dictionary Jump to navigation Jump to search English[edit] Etymology[edit] cryo- +\u200e -sol Noun[edit] cryosol (plural cryosols) A gelisol. Retrieved from \"https://en.wiktionary.org/w/index.php?title=cryosol&oldid=47370592\" Categories: English words prefixed with cryo-English words suffixed with -solEnglish lemmasEnglish nounsEnglish countable nouns Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces EntryDiscussion Variants Views ReadEditHistory More Search Navigation Main PageCommunity portalPreferencesRequested entriesRecent changesRandom entryHelpGlossaryDonationsContact us Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this page In other languages Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version This page was last edited on 29 August 2017, at 16:06. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Privacy policy About\u00a0Wiktionary Disclaimers Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "cryosol Laboratory of soil cryology HomeStaff NewsLibrary Photogallery New conference International conference: Solving the Puzzles from Cryosphere\u00a0 April 15\u201318, 2019 News in Brief International conference: Earth's Cryosphere: Past, Present and Future June 4\u20138, 2017 Kolyma 2016 Antarctic expedition 2015-2016 Conference of \"Permafrost in XXI century: basic and applied researches\u201d is over New article in PNAS Our work in 60th Russian Antarctic Expedition Celebration of Den Pobedy 2015 Recent additions to the library Interview of Elizaveta Rivkina for Schattenblick Ren TV about amoeba Media of Sankt-Petersburg University about joint investigations of amoeba The annual report for 2015 Artice about new giant virus (Mollivirus sibericum) Story of Alexey Lupachev about Yamal crater for Oka-info Research concept Achievements of the past 10 years History of the laboratory Best articles Copyright (c) 2014. Your company name heredesigned from atjoomla.com", "Gelisol - Wikipedia Gelisol From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia \u00a0\u00a0(Redirected from Cryosol) Jump to navigation Jump to search Gelisola Gelisol profileUsed inUSDA soil taxonomyProfileOACKey processcryoturbationParent materialpeat, otherClimatesubarctic, tundra Gelisols are an order in USDA soil taxonomy. They are soils of very cold climates which are defined as containing permafrost within two meters of the soil surface. The word \"Gelisol\" comes from the Latin gelare meaning \"to freeze\", a reference to the process of cryoturbation that occurs from the alternating thawing and freezing characteristic of Gelisols. In the World Reference Base for Soil Resources[1] (WRB), Gelisols are known as Cryosols. In soil taxonomy, Gelisols key out before the Histosols. In the WRB, the Histosols key out before the Cryosols. Organic permafrost soils are therefore Gelisols (Histels) in the soil taxonomy and Histosols (Cryic Histosols) in the WRB. Structurally, Gelisols may have a B horizon and more commonly have an A horizon and/or O horizon resting on the permafrost. Because soil organic matter accumulates in the upper layer, most Gelisols are black or dark brown in soil color, followed by a shallow mineral layer. Despite the influence of glaciation in most areas where Gelisols occur, chemically they are not highly fertile because nutrients, especially calcium and potassium, are very easily leached above the permafrost. The permafrost greatly restricts the engineering use of Gelisols, as large structures (e.g. buildings) subside as the frozen earth thaws when they are put in place. Gelisols are found chiefly in Siberia, Alaska and Canada. Smaller areas are found in the Andes (mainly near the intersection between Chile, Bolivia and Argentina), Tibet, northern Scandinavia and the ice-free parts of Greenland and Antarctica. Fossil Gelisols are known from as far back as Precambrian ice ages 900 million years ago. Contents 1 Suborders 2 See also 3 Weblinks 4 References Suborders[edit] In USDA soil taxonomy, Gelisols are subdivided into: Histels: organic soils similar to histosols except that they have permafrost within two meters below ground surface. They have 80% or more organic materials from the soil surface to a depth of 50\u00a0cm or to a glacic layer or densic, lithic, or paralithic contact, whichever is shallowest. These soils occur predominantly in subarctic and low arctic regions of continuous or widespread permafrost. Less than one-third of the active layer (the soil between the ground surface and a permafrost table) or an ice layer which is at least 30-cm thick has been cryoturbated. Turbels: soils that show marked influence of cryoturbation (more than one-third of the depth of the active layer) such as irregular, broken, or distorted horizon boundaries and involutions and areas with patterned ground. They commonly contain tongues of mineral and organic horizons, organic and mineral intrusions and oriented rock fragments. Organic matter is accumulated on top of the permafrost and ice or sand wedges are a common features. Turbels occur primarily in the zone of continuous permafrost. Orthels: soils that show little or no cryoturbation (less than one-third of the depth of the active layer). Patterned ground (except for polygons) generally is lacking. Orthels occur primarily within the zone of discontinuous permafrost, and in alpine areas. See also[edit] Active layer Pedogenesis Pedology (soil study) Soil classification Weblinks[edit] profile photos (with classification) WRB homepage profile photos (with classification) IUSS World of Soils References[edit] Soil Survey Staff: Keys to Soil Taxonomy. 12th edition. Natural Resources Conservation Service. U.S. Department of Agriculture. Washington D.C., USA, 2014. \"Gelisols\". USDA-NRCS. Archived from the original on 2006-05-09. Retrieved 2006-05-14. \"Gelisols\". University of Florida. Archived from the original on September 18, 2004. Retrieved 2006-05-14. \"Gelisols\". University of Idaho. Retrieved 2006-05-14. \"Permafrost Soils and Biogeochemistry\" (PDF). University of Wisconsin. Archived from the original (pdf) on 2004-03-20. Retrieved 2006-05-14. ^ IUSS Working Group WRB (2015). \"World Reference Base for Soil Resources 2014, Update 2015\" (PDF). World Soil Resources Reports 106, FAO, Rome. vteSoil classificationUSDA soil taxonomy Alfisols Andisols Aridisols Entisols Gelisols Histosols Inceptisols Mollisols Oxisols Spodosols Ultisols Vertisols World Reference Base for Soil Resources (1998\u2013) Acrisols Alisols Andosols Anthrosols Arenosols Calcisols Cambisols Chernozem Cryosols Durisols Ferralsols Fluvisols Gleysols Gypsisols Histosol Kastanozems Leptosols Lixisols Luvisols Nitisols Phaeozems Planosols Plinthosols Podzols Regosols Retisols Solonchaks Solonetz Stagnosol Technosols Umbrisols Vertisols Other soil classification systems FAO soil classification (1974\u201398) Unified Soil Classification System AASHTO Soil Classification System R\u00e9f\u00e9rentiel p\u00e9dologique (French classification system) Canadian system of soil classification Australian Soil Classification Polish Soil Classification 1938 USDA soil taxonomy List of U.S. state soils List of vineyard soil types Non-systematic soil types Sand Silt Clay Loam Topsoil Subsoil Soil crust Claypan Hardpan Gypcrust Caliche Parent material Pedosphere Laimosphere Rhizosphere Bulk soil Alkali soil Bay mud Blue goo Brickearth Brown earth Calcareous grassland Dark earth Dry quicksand Eluvium Expansive clay Fill dirt Fuller's earth Hydrophobic soil Loess Lunar soil Martian soil Mud Muskeg Paleosol Peat Pedalfer Pedocal Podzol Prime farmland Serpentine soil Spodic soil Subaqueous soil Terra preta Terra rossa (soil) Tropical peat Yedoma Types of soil Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gelisol&oldid=885997990\" Categories: PedologyTypes of soilArctic geography terminologyPermafrost Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces ArticleTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version Languages Az\u0259rbaycanca\u0411\u0435\u043b\u0430\u0440\u0443\u0441\u043a\u0430\u044fCatal\u00e0DeutschItalianoMagyarPolski\u0420\u0443\u0441\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439\u4e2d\u6587 Edit links This page was last edited on 3 March 2019, at 18:04\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "Crys Paledramon - Wikimon - The #1 Digimon wiki Crys Paledramon From Wikimon Jump to:\t\t\t\t\tnavigation, \t\t\t\t\tsearch Profile Name & Etymology Debut \u21e8 JapaneseOnly a select few Paledramon are able to evolve into Crys Paledramon. It is capable of freezing its entire body, forming armour that greatly raises its defensive and offensive power. Thanks to the large icicles mounted on its wings, it is not affected even by high temperatures. Not only that, the cold air it blasts from the icicle nozzles can be used to control air currents, allowing Crys Paledramon to maintain high-speed flight even during snowstorms. Its Signature Move is an omnidirectional attack where it fires all of the icicles on its wings at the enemy (Ice Blade Floating Cannon). Its Special Move is amassing a large amount of frost in an instant, forming a miniature iceberg which it then hurls at the enemy (Paradise Cryosol). Digimon Encounters \u21e8 English\u82cd\u9f99\u517d\u4e4b\u4e2d\uff0c\u53ea\u6709\u6781\u5c11\u6570\u53ef\u4ee5\u8fdb\u5316\u6210\u4e3a\u6676\u9f99\u517d\u3002\u80fd\u591f\u51b7\u51bb\u5168\u8eab\u4f7f\u4e4b\u5316\u4e3a\u76d4\u7532\uff0c\u5927\u5e45\u5ea6\u63d0\u9ad8\u9632\u5fa1\u529b\u548c\u653b \u51fb\u529b\u3002 \u7fbd\u7ffc\u4e0a\u7684\u5927\u578b\u51b0\u67f1\u53ef\u4ee5\u4fdd\u6301\u81ea\u5df1\u5728\u4efb\u4f55\u9ad8\u6e29\u4e0b\u4e0d\u53d7\u5f71\u54cd\u3002\u53e6\u5916\uff0c\u4ece\u55b7\u5c04\u53e3\u5c04\u51fa\u7684\u51b7\u6c14\u80fd\u591f\u64cd\u7eb5\u6c14\u6d41\uff0c\u4e5f\u53ef\u4fdd\u6301\u5728\u66b4 \u98ce\u96ea\u4e2d\u7684\u9ad8\u901f\u98de\u884c\u3002 \u666e\u901a\u6280\u662f\u91ca\u653e\u51fa\u7fbd\u7ffc\u4e0a\u7684\u5168\u90e8\u51b0\u67f1\u5411\u654c\u4eba\u5c55\u5f00\u5168\u65b9\u4f4d\u6253\u51fb\u7684\u300c\u51b0\u5203\u6d6e\u6e38\u70ae\u300d\u3002\u5fc5\u6740\u6280\u662f\u77ac\u95f4\u5c06\u5927\u91cf\u5bd2\u51b0\u805a\u96c6\u6210\u5c0f\u578b \u51b0\u5c71\uff0c\u6295\u63b7\u5411\u654c\u4eba\u7684\u300c\u6781\u4e50\u51bb\u571f\u300d\u3002 Template:Digimon EncountersK Name Etymology Name: Crys Paledramon Kanji/Kana: \u30af\u30ea\u30b9\u30da\u30fc\u30eb\u30c9\u30e9\u30e2\u30f3 Romanization: Kurisup\u0113rudoramon Digimoji: | Crys n., Short for crystal. | Pale n., From the color pale blue. | DraShort for dragon and a reference to the Dramon-species. Year Active 2018 Game/V-Pet Digimon Encounters English Japanese Key Contents CRYSPALEDRAMON Level Perfect [1] List of Digimon \u30af\u30ea\u30b9\u30da\u30fc\u30eb\u30c9\u30e9\u30e2\u30f3 \u30ec\u30d9\u30eb \u5b8c\u5168\u4f53 [1] List of Digimon Special/Signature Moves Special/Signature Moves (other Digimon) Forms Forms (other Digimon) Equipment Equipment (other Digimon) Titles Titles (other Digimon) Contents 1 Attack Techniques 2 Evolution 2.1 Evolves From 2.2 Evolves To 3 Appearances 3.1 Anime 3.2 Manga 3.3 Video Games 3.3.1 Digimon Encounters 3.4 Virtual Pets 3.5 TCG 4 Additional Information Attack Techniques[edit] Name Kanji/Kana Romanization Description Ice Blade Floating Cannon [1] \u51b0\u5203\u6d6e\u6e38\u70ae An omnidirectional attack by fires all of the icicles on its wings at the enemy. Paradise Cryosol [1] \u6781\u4e50\u51bb\u571f Amasses a large amount of frost in an instant to form a miniature iceberg which it then hurls at the enemy. Evolution[edit] Evolves From[edit] Paledramon Evolves To[edit] Appearances[edit] Anime[edit] Manga[edit] Video Games[edit] Digimon Encounters[edit] Virtual Pets[edit] TCG[edit] Additional Information[edit] References Notes \u2191 1.0 1.1 1.2 Digimon Encounters Retrieved from \"https://wikimon.net/index.php?title=Crys_Paledramon&oldid=325700\" Categories: DigimonPerfect LevelDigimon introduced in 2018Hidden category: Pages using duplicate arguments in template calls Navigation menu Personal tools Talk Contributions Create account Log in Page Discussion View Edit History Wikimon Navigation Main Page Community Portal Recent Changes Random Page Wikimon Rules List of Images DATS Forums Creditation Support Donate via PayPal Why Support Wikimon? Search Affiliates Digimons World Wikibound WiKirby F-Zero Wiki NIWA ...learn more! Other Digiwikis English Wikia Polish Wikia Tools What links here Related changes Special pages Printable version Permanent link Page information Google AdSense This page was last modified on 4 November 2018, at 18:17. Content is available under a Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License unless otherwise noted. About Wikimon Disclaimers", "About - CryoSol World HomeVitroJetNewsEventsPublicationsAboutContact Select Page AboutCryoSol-World (CryoSol) is a leading developer of sample preparation technology for cryo-electron microscopy. CryoSol was founded in March 2018 by scientists and entrepreneurs with a track record in the field of cryo-EM and originates from research performed at Maastricht University, the Netherlands. Our VitroJet technology has been invented by the team responsible for the development of its predecessor, the Vitrobot, currently the standard in cryo-sample preparation equipment worldwide.Mission statementCryoSol aims to become a global technology leader in sample preparation technology for cryo-EM single particle analysis, cryo-electron tomography, cell biology, soft matter research and liquid phase electron microscopy, enabling scientists, researchers and engineers in their quest to vitrify their samples of interest, allowing high quality imaging and reconstruction.Cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) plays a key role in unraveling the three-dimensional structure of macromolecules and their cellular functions. This knowledge contributes to developing new medicines and treatments for diseases. Ben Bormans MScCEO, CryoSol-WorldOur visionCryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) plays a key role in unraveling the three-dimensional structure of macromolecules and their cellular functions. This knowledge contributes to developing new medicines and treatments for diseases. Vitrification of biological materials is required to preserve the biological samples in their native state. Optimization of the sample preparation process greatly contributes to workflow effectiveness and efficiency. Cryo-EM will shift from \u2018high content\u2019-technology to \u2018high throughput\u2019-solution, in which sample preparation is the key enabling technology. CryoSol is dedicated to providing high-end sample preparation solutions. History of CryoSol-WorldCryoSol-World is founded on research executed at Maastricht University, dating back to the early 90\u2019s of the previous century.\u00a0 In close collaboration between Dr. Peter Frederik of the cryo-mlectron microscopy (cryo-EM) laboratory and Maastricht Instruments, a device for automated vitrification of very thin samples, the \u2018Vitrobot\u2019, was developed. The Vitrobot rapidly proved to be a fitting solution for vitrification and became the standard for sample preparation for cryo-EM after licensing it to FEI in 2002 (now ThermoFisher Scientific). Today, the Division of Nanoscopy of the Maastricht MultiModal Molecular Imaging Institute (M4I) continues advancing structural biology by tackling tuberculosis and cancer. Led by Prof. dr. Peter Peters, both single particle analysis as well as electron tomography are applied to gain understanding of macromolecular nano-machinery inside human cells and their pathogens. The aim is applying this knowledge for the design of effective drugs and treatments for diseases that affect millions of people worldwide. Since the development of the Vitrobot, the Division of Nanoscopy and engineers from Instrument Development, Engineering and Evaluation (IDEE) of Maastricht University have been developing the next generation technology and applications in cryo-workflows to study single particles, cells and organoids. This has resulted in the VitroJet, which is proudly presented to you by CryoSolCryoSol-World team Ben Bormans MScCEOBen is a seasoned entrepreneur with over 40 years of experience in the field of electron microscopy. Having worked for FEI for over 20 years, he founded DENSSolutions in 20XX and CryoSol-World in 2018. His drive? Maximizing the power of TEM to resolve structures and with that knowledge, build a sustainable society. Bart Beulen PhD MScCTOBart obtained his MSc in Applied Physics (2005) and his PhD (2009) from the\u00a0Eindhoven University of Technology, where his research was focused on fluid dynamics. After obtaining his PhD, Bart moved to\u00a0Maastricht University where he was involved in the research and development of innovative\u00a0life science technology. At the inception of CryoSol\u00a0in 2018, Bart joined the company, after working on the VitroJet development at Maastricht University for the past 3 years. Why? I have a passion for the high-tech R&D that is at the foundation of the next generation vitrification technology and I am committed to make this development into a success. Prof. Peter Peters PhDCSOProf. Peters\u2019s current research aims to reveal and manipulate the macromolecular organization of cellsunder normal and pathogenic conditions at the nanoscale level. His lab uses cryo\u2013electron tomographyof vitreous sections and cryo-FIB/SEM lamellae. Using these methods, his researchgroup aims to resolve the type VII secretion system of Mycobacterium tuberculosis within thephagolysosome. In parallel, his research is focused on developing methodological improvements andestablishing technology infrastructures to enable, improve, and maximize the potential of cryo-EM. Heis co-founder of CryoSol-World. Giulia Weissenberger MScApplication engineer Bringing more of a biologicalperspective to the team, Giulia joined CryoSol-World to take the role as applications engineer. Before transferring to the Netherlands for her master\u2019s, Giulia worked in an infectious disease department in the US focusing on the design and purification of recombinant proteins for vaccine and rapid assay development. Following this, she obtained her master\u2019s in Biomedical Engineering from Eindhoven University of Technology (TU/e) combining her biochemical background with the dynamic field of biotechnology. With a passion for science and impatience for better technology, she aims to contribute in the rapidly advancing world of cryoEM in the search and resolution of near-atomic structures. Ren\u00e9 Henderikx MScDevelopment engineer Being the youngest Mechanical Engineering graduate of his class, Rene focused on microfluidics in disease diagnosis during his graduation. As he enjoys working under pressure, he joined DENSSolutions in 2016 with the release of a gas supply system for TEM nano-reactors. His next challenge was demonstrating the Vitrojet\u2019s proof of principle at Maastricht University. This evolved into a role as development engineer within CryoSol, where he aims to combine different disciplines to bring sample preparation to the next level! Bas Lemmens MScVP business developmentAfter graduation from Wageningen University in the field of bioprocess engineering in 1997, Bas joined the team responsible for the Vitrobot-development in 2001. After founding his own company in 2010 in the field of fetal monitoring, he stepped back in 2018 to join CryoSol to work on the next generation vitrification technology. Why? The challenge of discovering molecular mechanisms which may lead to finding cures for diseases is rewarding to contribute to.LinkedInM4I Research team, Maastricht University, the NetherlandsCryoSol cooperates with the M4I Division of Nanoscopy department of Maastricht University, headed by Prof. dr. Peter Peters. M4I Division of Nanoscopy strives for greater insight into the 3D structure of proteins in cells, paving the way for developing more effective treatments for diseases such as cancer and tuberculosis while gaining better understanding of how protein complexes manage healthy and diseased cells, allowing drugs, vaccines and treatments to work more effectively.Careers, join usAs a young ambitious company, we are always open to discuss opportunities with highly skilled and motivated people in the field of cryo EM.For unsolicited applications, please send a resume and motivation letter to info@cryosol-world.com. Cryosol WorldHomeVitroJetPublicationsAboutContactLatest News CryoSol-World welcomes Frank Nijpels as a new team member Diekirch-Valkenswaard bicycle tour Proof-of-principle of the VitroJet CryoSol-World is foundedView All NewsUpcoming Events Journ\u00e9e Roger Monier, Institut Curie, Paris, France, April 5, 2019 April 5 CCP-EM Spring Symposium, Nottingham University, April 29 \u2013 May 1, 2019 April 29 @ 8:00 am - May 1 @ 5:00 pm iNext workshop on Integrated Methodologies and Approaches for Structural Biology, Brno, Czech Republic, May 29 \u2013 31, 2019 May 29 @ 8:00 am - May 31 @ 5:00 pm View All Events", "USDA History | National Agricultural Library | USDA Jump to Main Content United States Department of Agriculture National Agricultural Library Ask Contact Visit Today's hours: 08:30 AM - 04:30 PM TopicsAgricultural LawAnimals and LivestockEducation and OutreachFarms and Farming SystemsFood and Human NutritionInvasive SpeciesMarketing and TradeNatural Resources and EnvironmentPlants and CropsResearch and TechnologyRural DevelopmentVisual Arts and Agricultural HistoryPublicationsAlternative Farming Animal WelfareFood and NutritionGeneral Collections Quarterly ReviewPasture, Forage and RangelandRural IssuesSupporting Agricultural ResearchWater and AgricultureCollectionsDigital CollectionsExhibitsGovernment DocumentsNAL Catalog (AGRICOLA)PubAgSpecial CollectionsDataAg Data CommonsAgro-ecosystem Datai5k Workspace @NALLCA Digital CommonsPhytochem & EthnobotanyServicesAsk a QuestionBorrow MaterialsDigiTopInformation CentersNAL ThesaurusAboutContact UsInternshipsVisit the Library TopicsAgricultural LawFarm Bill Animals and LivestockAlternative Livestock Animal Experimentation and Animal Use Alternatives Animal Health and Veterinary Medicine Aquaculture Beef Cattle and Meat Production Dairy Cattle and Dairy Farming Horses Insects and Entomology Poultry and Poultry Production Sheep, Goats, and Small Ruminants Swine Education and OutreachAgricultural Education Educational Resources for Children, Parents, and Teachers Vocational Education and Job Training Farms and Farming SystemsAquaculture Beginning Farmers Sustainable Agriculture Veterans in Agriculture Food and Human NutritionDietary Guidelines and Human Health Dietary Supplements Food and Nutrition Programs Food Composition Food Industry Food Safety Meal Planning, Food Purchasing, and Cooking Nutrition Education Nutrition Research Invasive Species Marketing and TradeAgricultural Subsidies Distribution, Imports, and Exports Economics and Agricultural Statistics Marketing Strategies, Consumer Behavior, and Trade Trade Policy Natural Resources and EnvironmentClimate Change Energy Forestry and Grasslands Land Resources Leisure, Recreation, and Tourism Pollution, Waste Management, and Natural Resources Conservation Soil Resource Management Sustainable Agriculture Water Resources Weather Wildlife and Biological Resources Plants and CropsAgricultural Biotechnology, Plant Genetics, and Plant Breeding Commercial Horticulture Field Crops and Crop Production Home Gardening Lawns and Turf, Landscaping, and Ornamental Plants Plant Diseases and Disorders, Plant Pests, and Weeds Research and TechnologyBioenergy and Biofuels Biotechnology Production Technology and Agricultural Engineering Research and Development Rural DevelopmentEconomic and Rural Development Rural America Collections Rural Citizen Services Rural Environmental Justice Resource Collection Rural Funding Resources Sustainable Rural Communities What is Rural? Visual Arts and Agricultural HistoryAbraham Lincoln and Agriculture Agricultural History Biographies Digital Images, Photographs, and Publications Professional Society and Organizational History USDA History PublicationsAlternative Farming Animal Welfare Food and Nutrition General Collections Quarterly Review Pasture, Forage and Rangeland Rural Issues Supporting Agricultural Research Water and Agriculture CollectionsDigital Collections Exhibits Government Documents NAL Catalog (AGRICOLA)Catalog Search Tips PubAg Special Collections DataAg Data Commons Agro-ecosystem Data i5k Workspace @NAL LCA Digital Commons Phytochem & Ethnobotany ServicesAsk a Question Borrow Materials DigiTop Information Centers NAL Thesaurus AboutContact UsKey Personnel and Services Staff Directory Internships Visit the Library National Agricultural Library Search form Search Agricultural LawFarm Bill Animals and LivestockAlternative Livestock Animal Experimentation and Animal Use Alternatives Animal Health and Veterinary Medicine Aquaculture Beef Cattle and Meat Production Dairy Cattle and Dairy Farming Horses Insects and Entomology Poultry and Poultry Production Sheep, Goats, and Small Ruminants Swine Education and OutreachAgricultural Education Educational Resources for Children, Parents, and Teachers Vocational Education and Job Training Farms and Farming SystemsAquaculture Beginning Farmers Sustainable Agriculture Veterans in AgricultureCareers in Agriculture Farm Training and Apprenticeships Support for Military Families Technical Assistance and Resources for Veterans Veteran Farming Legal Resources Veterans in USDA Programs Food and Human NutritionDietary Guidelines and Human Health Dietary Supplements Food and Nutrition Programs Food Composition Food Industry Food Safety Meal Planning, Food Purchasing, and Cooking Nutrition Education Nutrition Research Invasive Species Marketing and TradeAgricultural Subsidies Distribution, Imports, and Exports Economics and Agricultural Statistics Marketing Strategies, Consumer Behavior, and Trade Trade Policy Natural Resources and EnvironmentClimate Change Energy Forestry and Grasslands Land Resources Leisure, Recreation, and Tourism Pollution, Waste Management, and Natural Resources Conservation Soil Resource Management Sustainable Agriculture Water Resources Weather Wildlife and Biological Resources Plants and CropsAgricultural Biotechnology, Plant Genetics, and Plant Breeding Commercial Horticulture Field Crops and Crop Production Home Gardening Lawns and Turf, Landscaping, and Ornamental Plants Plant Diseases and Disorders, Plant Pests, and Weeds Research and TechnologyBioenergy and Biofuels Biotechnology Production Technology and Agricultural Engineering Research and Development Rural DevelopmentEconomic and Rural Development Rural America Collections Rural Citizen Services Rural Environmental Justice Resource Collection Rural Funding Resources Sustainable Rural Communities What is Rural? Visual Arts and Agricultural HistoryAbraham Lincoln and Agriculture Agricultural History BiographiesGeorge Washington Carver Digital Images, Photographs, and Publications Professional Society and Organizational History USDA History You are hereHome \u00bb Information Centers \u00bb Food Safety Research Information Office \u00bb Topics \u00bb Visual Arts and Agricultural History \u00bb USDA History USDA History An Act to Establish a Department of Agriculture USDA. National Agricultural Library. Provides the text of Abraham Lincoln's legislation establishing the Department of Agriculture. USDA\u2019s History Comes Alive at the National Agricultural Library USDA. ARS. National Agricultural Library. Exhibits highlights of special collections at the National Agricultural Library including original artworks, the fiber collection, archival journals, correspondence, and scientific reports. National Agricultural Library Timeline USDA. ARS. National Agricultural Library. Presents a timeline of the National Agricultural Library. USDA Celebrates 150 Years USDA. Records activities of the USDA in 2012 to celebrate the 150th year of the department. Former Secretaries of Agriculture USDA. Introduces United States Secretaries of Agriculture chronologically with short biographies. 150th Anniversary of United States Department of Agriculture USDA. Demonstrates 150 years of service by the USDA to the American public with a pictorial overview of USDA activities National Agricultural Statistics Service USDA. National Agricultural Statistics Service. Presents a historical overview of the National Agricultural Statistics Service. National Agricultural Statistics Service USDA. National Agricultural Statistics Service. Presents a historical overview of the National Agricultural Statistics Service. United States Experiment Station Record University of North Texas. Displays full text historical publications of the United States Department of Agriculture's Office of Experiment Stations from 1889 to 1941. Accessibility Statement Agricultural Research Service FOIA Information Quality NAL Home Non-Discrimination Statement Plain Writing Privacy Policy Site Map USA.gov USDA.gov Web Policies & Links WhiteHouse.gov National Agricultural Library \u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 10301 Baltimore Avenue \u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 Beltsville, MD 20705 \u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 301-504-5755", "International Permafrost Association - Wikipedia International Permafrost Association From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (Learn how and when to remove these template messages) This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find sources:\u00a0\"International Permafrost Association\"\u00a0\u2013\u00a0news\u00a0\u00b7 newspapers\u00a0\u00b7 books\u00a0\u00b7 scholar\u00a0\u00b7 JSTOR (April 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article includes a list of references, but its sources remain unclear because it has insufficient inline citations. Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. (April 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards. The specific problem is: This article has many external links within the article, contrary to WP:EXT Please help improve this article if you can. (April 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject, potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral. Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent, third-party sources. (April 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines. Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references. (April 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) (Learn how and when to remove this template message) International Permafrost AssociationIPAAbbreviationIPAFormation1983TypeINGORegion served WorldwideOfficial language English, FrenchParent organizationInternational Union of Geological SciencesWebsiteIPA Official website Extent of permafrost in the Northern Hemisphere. The International Permafrost Association (IPA), founded in 1983, has as its objectives to foster the dissemination of knowledge concerning permafrost and to promote cooperation among persons and national or international organisations engaged in scientific investigation and engineering work related to permafrost and seasonally frozen ground. The IPA became an Affiliated Organisation of the International Union of Geological Sciences in July 1989. Permafrost or perennially frozen ground is defined as earth material that remains at or below 0\u00a0\u00b0C for at least two consecutive years. As such, upwards of 25% of Planet Earth is underlain to some degree by permafrost and in extreme conditions reaches depths of 1500 meters. Permafrost occurs in the high latitudes and mountains and plateaus of both hemispheres. Contents 1 Objectives 2 Organization and structure 3 Publication and Information 4 Major activities 5 Recent and future activities 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Objectives[edit] The Association\u2019s primary responsibilities are to convene International Permafrost Conferences, undertake special projects such as preparing databases, maps, bibliographies, and glossaries, and coordinate international field programmes and networks. International conferences were held at: West Lafayette, Indiana, U.S.A. (1963); Yakutsk, Siberia (1973); Edmonton, Canada (1978); Fairbanks, Alaska (1983); Trondheim, Norway (1988); Beijing, China (1993); Yellowknife, Canada (1998); and Zurich, Switzerland (2003: ICOP 2003). The Ninth International Conference on Permafrost (NICOP) was held in Fairbanks, Alaska, June 29-July 3, 2008 and the Tenth took place in Salekhard, Russia, June 25\u201329, 2012 (TICOP 2012). The Eleventh International Conference on Permafrost will be held in Potsdam, Germany in 2016. Field excursions are an integral part of each Conference, and are organised by the host country. Regional conferences are organised between the main conferences (in Europe, Russia, China). Organization and structure[edit] Membership is through adhering national or multinational organisations or as Associate Members in countries where no Adhering Body exists. The IPA is governed by an Executive Committee and a Council consisting of representatives from 26 Adhering Bodies having interests in some aspect of theoretical, basic and applied frozen ground research, including permafrost, periglacial phenomena, seasonal frost, and artificial ground freezing. Members are: Argentina, Austria, Canada, China, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Iceland, Italy, Japan, Kyrgyzstan, Mongolia, The Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, South Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom, United States of America. News from the IPA members are posted on the IPA webpage.[1] The officers of the seven-member Executive Committee (2012\u20132016) are: President: Prof. Antoni Lewkowicz (Canada) Vice Presidents: Prof. Hanne Christiansen (Norway) and Prof. Vladimir Romanovsky (USA) Members: Dr. Hugues Lantuit (Germany), Prof. Lothar Schrott (Austria), Dr. Dmitry Sergeev (Russia) and Prof. Ma Wei (China) The Executive Director is Dr. Inga May (Germany). The IPA Constitution provides for three categories of Working Group Parties: standing committees (long-term), working groups (5\u201310 years) and action groups (1\u20132 years) that organise and coordinate research activities and special projects. The first category includes a Standing Committee for Data, Information and Communication, an International Advisory Committee for the International Permafrost Conferences, and a Standing Committee for Education and Outreach. There are ten Working Groups, each with two co-chairs and some with subgroups. These are: \u2022 Antarctic Permafrost and Periglacial Environments \u2022 Coastal and Offshore Permafrost (see: Arctic Coastal Dynamics webpage) \u2022 Cryosol \u2022 Glacier and Permafrost Hazards in High Mountains (see: GAPHAZ webpage) \u2022 Isotopes and Geochemistry of Permafrost \u2022 Mapping and Modelling of Mountain Permafrost \u2022 Periglacial Landforms, Processes, and Climate \u2022 Permafrost and Climate \u2022 Permafrost Astrobiology \u2022 Permafrost Engineering Details of the Working Parties goals and activities are found on the IPA website.[2] The International Secretariat is based at the Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research under the direction of Dr. Inga May (Germany). Annual membership contributions are used for producing and distributing Frozen Ground, and support of Working Parties and committee activities and representations at international meetings. Publication and Information[edit] Proceedings of peer-reviewed papers are produced for each International Permafrost Conference by the host country, as are field trip guidebooks. A list of publications is found on the IPA website.[3] The News Bulletin Frozen Ground is published annually and has a distribution of over 2500. Current and back issues are posted online.[3] The Circum-Arctic Map of Permafrost and Ground-Ice Conditions at a scale of 1:10,000,000 was prepared by an international team and published in the Circum-Pacific map series in 1997. The CAPS: Circumpolar Active-Layer Permafrost System, version 2.0 CD-ROM is a compilation of global frozen ground data and information. Permafrost and Frozen Ground: Bibliography 1978 \u2013 2003, Glaciological Data Report GD-31, is an online bibliography of the world\u2019s literature. Both are produced in conjunction with the International Permafrost Conferences and available from the National Snow and Ice Data Center. An illustrated Glossary of Permafrost and Related Ground-Ice Terms in 12 languages (Chinese, English, French, German, Icelandic, Italian, Norwegian, Polish, Romanian, Russian, Swedish, and Spanish), 278 pages, was produced in 1998. IPA cooperates with the American Geological Institute by providing literature to its Cold Regions Bibliography Project. Major activities[edit] The IPA coordinates and cooperates with several other major international programmes and organizations. Briefly these are: Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost (GTN-P) is a WMO network for monitoring of the active layer and the Thermal State of Permafrost (TSP). The IPA manages the GTN-P. The Circumpolar Active Layer Monitoring (CALM) program has 125 reporting stations and TSP has identified over 800 boreholes; both include a total of over 15 participating countries. Arctic Coastal Dynamics (ACD) is a joint programme with the International Arctic Science Committee (IASC) and the IGBP(International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme) - LOICZ (Land-Ocean Interactions in the Coastal Zone) programme to estimate the organic carbon content and mineral transfer for eroding permafrost onto the Arctic shelves. The IPA is collaborating with the International Union for Quaternary Research (INQUA). The IPA has a Memorandum of Understanding with the Climate and Cryosphere (CliC) programme of the World Climate Research Programme (WCRP). The main areas of cooperation are on the roles of permafrost on water and carbon balances, and data assimilation and modelling. Beginning in 1995 the IPA and the International Geographical Union (IGU) developed an Agreement of Cooperation, thus making IPA an affiliate of the IGU. The current IGU collaboration is within its Commission on Cold Regions Environments. Coordination of activities on permafrost, soils and periglacial environments of the Antarctic and sub-Antarctic islands is a joint programme with an Expert Group of the Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research (SCAR). Activities related to glaciers and permafrost hazards in the high mountains (GAPHAZ) are a joint activity with the International Union of Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG) and its newly designated Commission for the Cryospheric Sciences. The topic of carbon sources and sinks in cold regions soils (cryosols) and permafrost is a joint program with the Global Carbon Project (GPC) and the joint working group on Cryosol of the International Union of Soil Sciences (IUSS). Recent and future activities[edit] IPA was actively involved in the International Polar Year International Polar Year (IPY) by participating with four coordinated projects. The Thermal State of Permafrost (TSP) proposes to obtain a \u2018snapshot\u2019 of permafrost temperatures throughout Planet Earth during the period 2007-2008. Another objective of TSP is to establish a permanent International Network of Permafrost Observatories (INPO) within the framework of the Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost (GTN-P). The three other IPY projects are concerned with Antarctic and sub-Antarctic Permafrost, Periglacial and Soil Environments (ANTPAS) and with the Arctic Circum-Polar Coastal Observatory Network (ACCO-Net) and Carbon Pools in Permafrost Regions (CAPP), and revised regional permafrost maps of Central Asia and the Nordic region. For updated news about IPA activities linked to IPY, see the IPA website.[4] Several regional permafrost and soils conferences were held and are planned, including: \u2022\tThe First European Conference on Permafrost (EUCOP I) in Rome (Italy), in 2001; \u2022\tThe Second European Conference on Permafrost (EUCOP II) in Potsdam (Germany), in June 2005; \u2022\tThe Fourth International Conference on Cryopedology, was held in Arkhangelsk (Russia), in August 2005; \u2022\tThe Asian Conference on Permafrost convenes in Lanzhou (China), in early August 2006 with a field excursion to the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau; \u2022\tThe Ninth International Conference on Permafrost (NICOP) was held in early summer 2008 in Fairbanks (U.S.A.). \u2022\tThe Third European Conference on Permafrost (EUCOP III) was held in July 2010 in Longyearbyen, Svalbard, Norway. \u2022\tThe Tenth International Conference on Permafrost (TICOP) took place in June 2012 in Salekhard, Russia. \u2022\tEUCOP IV will be hosted by the University of \u00c9vora in collaboration with the University of Lisbon in \u00c9vora, Portugal in 2014 and ICOP 11 is planned for 2016 in Potsdam, Germany. See also[edit] Permafrost Young Researchers Network (PYRN) International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS) International Geographical Union (IGU) International Polar Year (IPY) Permafrost References[edit] ^ \"Frozen Ground, the News Bulletin of the IPA\". International Permafrost Association. Retrieved 2016-04-28. ^ \"Action Groups\". International Permafrost Association. Retrieved 2016-04-28. ^ a b \"Publications\". International Permafrost Association. Retrieved 2016-04-28. ^ \"International Polar Year (2007-2009)\". International Permafrost Association. Retrieved 2016-04-28. Further reading[edit] J. Brown & H.H. Christiansen. International Permafrost Association. Episodes, Volume 28, no.4, pp.\u00a0301\u2013302, December 2005. External links[edit] International Permafrost Association (IPA) Organisations International Polar Year (IPY) Permafrost Young Researchers Network (PYRN) National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC) International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS) International Geographical Union (IGU) 9th International Conference on Permafrost (NICOP) United States Permafrost Association Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost (GTN-P) Information about Permafrost ' U.S. Arctic Research Commission: Report on Climate Change, Permafrost and Impact on Civil Infrastructure All About Frozen Ground, National Snow and Ice Data Center Frederick E. Nelson. (Un)frozen in Time. (Science, 14, March 2003: Vol. 299, no. 5613, pp. 1673 - 1675) What is Permafrost?, Geological Survey of Canada Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Permafrost_Association&oldid=855099907\" Categories: PermafrostEarth sciences organizationsGeology organizationsInternational scientific organizationsInternational organisations based in GermanyScientific organizations established in 1983Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from April 2016All articles needing additional referencesArticles lacking in-text citations from April 2016All articles lacking in-text citationsArticles needing cleanup from April 2016All pages needing cleanupCleanup tagged articles with a reason field from April 2016Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from April 2016Articles lacking reliable references from April 2016All articles lacking reliable referencesWikipedia external links cleanup from April 2016Wikipedia spam cleanup from April 2016Articles with multiple maintenance issues Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces ArticleTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version Languages Add links This page was last edited on 15 August 2018, at 23:11\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "Cryosol - International Permafrost Association Arctic Portal AP Community Portlets Arctic Council Science Organizations Maps Library Acronyms Links Search International Permafrost Association Fostering permafrost research to the ends of the Earth Search ... Member login Contact \ufeff Menu HomeAbout Us Antarctic Permafrost and Periglacial EnvironmentsCoastal and Offshore Permafrost Dynamics (COPD)CryosolGlaciers and Permafrost Hazards in High Mountain Slopes (GAPHAZ)Isotopes and Geochemistry of PermafrostPeriglacial Landforms, Processes and ClimatePermafrost and Climate Modeling and Mapping Subgroup Planetary Permafrost and AstrobiologyPermafrost Engineering Subgroup on Engineering Geology for Development in Permafrost Regions Task Force on Remote SensingTask Force on Subglacial PermafrostStanding Committee on Data, Information and CommunicationsStanding Committee on Education and OutreachInternational Advisory Committee for ICOPCarbon Pools in Permafrost Regions (CAPP)Arctic Circumpolar Coastal Observatory Network (ACCONET)Arctic Coastal Dynamics (ACD)International Polar Year (2007-2009) OfficersCountry MembersConstitutionResolutionsExternal RelationsStanding Committees ANTPASEducation & Outreach HistoryBecome a Member Activities Action GroupsInterest Groups Permafrost and Carbon Budgets Core Projects PRP IPA Awards Pewe AwardMelnikov AwardLifetime Award Outreach Outreach ActivitiesPYRN Meetings International ConferencesRegional Conferences Publications IPA Newsletter - Frozen GroundIPA Country ReportsPPP ReportsConference ProceedingsReports and MinutesHandbookGlossaryOccasional Publications What is Permafrost?International Report \"State of the Arctic Coast 2010\" Products Permafrost Data IPA Permafrost MapGTN-P Workshop 2015GTN-P Workshop 2013GTN-P Workshop 2011TSPCALM Mailing ListCourses (IUCP)Media PrintGalleriesPodcasts Member Area Home About Us Working parties Cryosol Cryosol 2. Cryosol Co-chairs Galina Mazhitova, Russia galina_mazhitova@mail.ru Eva-Maria Pfeiffer, Germany empfeiffer@ifb.uni-hamburg.de Statement of Goals: Link the knowledge about cryosols in both hemispheres including Arctic, Antarctic and mountain regions Evaluate what will happen with regional C-pools under ongoing climate and environmental changes Contribute knowledge about Cryosol related processes for climate, hydrology, and ecological modelling Teach young permafrost students/scientists about the diversity and importance of cryosols as a basic knowledge for the protection of cold ecosystems Activities Organizing a bipolar CWG workshop \u201cClimate Change and Cryosols\u201d Publish a review (trend) paper on Cryosols of both hemispheres under a changing climate V International Conference on Cryopedology (2009, Ulan-Ude, Russia), IUSS Congress (2010, Brisbane, Australia), field trip to Antarctica on Correlation of Antarctic and Arctic soil processes (2010 or 2011) Web page: http://www.geowiss.uni-hamburg.de/i-boden/CWG-IPA-IUSS/index.htmlLiaison person with SCDIC: Eva-Maria PfeifferLiaison international organisations and programmes: IUSS, CAPP, GCP, ANTPAS, CALM Officers Country Members Constitution Resolutions External Relations Standing Committees ANTPAS Education & Outreach History Become a Member Contact: contact@ipa-permafrost.orgThe International Permafrost Association website is designed and hosted by the Arctic PortalCopyright \u00a9 2008-2015 International Permafrost Association All Rights Reserved IPA on Facebook IPA on Twitter IPA on Youtube IPA RSS", "International Permafrost Association - International Permafrost Association Arctic Portal AP Community Portlets Arctic Council Science Organizations Maps Library Acronyms Links Search International Permafrost Association Fostering permafrost research to the ends of the Earth Search ... Member login Contact \ufeff Menu HomeAbout Us Antarctic Permafrost and Periglacial EnvironmentsCoastal and Offshore Permafrost Dynamics (COPD)CryosolGlaciers and Permafrost Hazards in High Mountain Slopes (GAPHAZ)Isotopes and Geochemistry of PermafrostPeriglacial Landforms, Processes and ClimatePermafrost and Climate Modeling and Mapping Subgroup Planetary Permafrost and AstrobiologyPermafrost Engineering Subgroup on Engineering Geology for Development in Permafrost Regions Task Force on Remote SensingTask Force on Subglacial PermafrostStanding Committee on Data, Information and CommunicationsStanding Committee on Education and OutreachInternational Advisory Committee for ICOPCarbon Pools in Permafrost Regions (CAPP)Arctic Circumpolar Coastal Observatory Network (ACCONET)Arctic Coastal Dynamics (ACD)International Polar Year (2007-2009) OfficersCountry MembersConstitutionResolutionsExternal RelationsStanding Committees ANTPASEducation & Outreach HistoryBecome a Member Activities Action GroupsInterest Groups Permafrost and Carbon Budgets Core Projects PRP IPA Awards Pewe AwardMelnikov AwardLifetime Award Outreach Outreach ActivitiesPYRN Meetings International ConferencesRegional Conferences Publications IPA Newsletter - Frozen GroundIPA Country ReportsPPP ReportsConference ProceedingsReports and MinutesHandbookGlossaryOccasional Publications What is Permafrost?International Report \"State of the Arctic Coast 2010\" Products Permafrost Data IPA Permafrost MapGTN-P Workshop 2015GTN-P Workshop 2013GTN-P Workshop 2011TSPCALM Mailing ListCourses (IUCP)Media PrintGalleriesPodcasts Member Area Photo: Batagai, Russia - Frank Kienast \u201cI encourage all those associated with permafrost science and engineering to become individual members of the IPA.\u201d A.G. Lewkowicz (IPA President, 2012-2016) Join Us! Photo: Herschel Island, Canada - Michael Fritz Photo: Kitzsteinhorn, Austria - Keuschnig & Hartmeyer Photo: Reticular structures of ice-wedge polygons in the permafrost landscape, Russia - Konstanze Piel Photo: Trans-Alaska Pipeline, USA - Antoni Lewkowicz \u2039\u203a IPA News Submit a session proposal for ICOP 2020 11 Feb 2019 Read the annual news bulletin: Frozen Ground 42 25 Jan 2019 IPA Senior VP Chris Burn awarded Canadian Polar Medal 6 Nov 2018 Call for new IPA Action Groups 1 Oct 2018 Register for the Canadian Permafrost Association annual meeting 26 Sep 2018 Official opening of EUCOP5 and presentation of the 2018 Lifetime Achievement Award to Prof. Dr. Wilfried Haeberli 25 Jun 2018 27th IPA Council Meeting held in Chamonix 24 Jun 2018 Read all the News What is Permafrost? Permafrost is defined as ground (soil or rock and included ice or organic material) [...] Permafrost Data The Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost (GTN-P) is the primary international [...] Get Involved! \"I encourage all those associated with permafrost science and engineering to become [...] Core Projects Permafrost Research Priorities (PRP) - A roadmap for the future of permafrost research [...] IPA News Bulletin Frozen Ground is the news bulletin of the IPA and is published annually. [...] Upcoming Events 12th International Conference on Permafrost (ICOP 2020), 22-26 June 2020, http://icop2020.csp.escience.cn Newsletter If you wish to get IPA news updates, please subscribe to our newsletter. Follow Us Contact Us International Permafrost Association c/o Sarah Strand The University Centre in Svalbard (UNIS) PO Box 1569171 Longyearbyen Svalbard, Norway Email: contact@ipa-permafrost.org Contact: contact@ipa-permafrost.orgThe International Permafrost Association website is designed and hosted by the Arctic PortalCopyright \u00a9 2008-2015 International Permafrost Association All Rights Reserved IPA on Facebook IPA on Twitter IPA on Youtube IPA RSS", "Cryosol | Soil Monoliths Soil Monoliths Search Primary Menu Skip to content Home Site Content Brunisol Chernozem Gleysol Luvisol Solonetz Podzol Organic Regosol Cryosol Vertisol About About History Team Contact Tutorial How to Read a Soil Monolith Practice Questions Parent Material Index Resources Search for: Cryosol Soil mixing due to freeze/thaw is visible in this Cryosolic profile. Cryosols (or Gelisols in USDA Soil Taxonomy) have permafrost either within 1 m of the surface or within 2 m if the pedon is strongly cryoturbated in the active layer.\u00a0 They form in regions that have a mean annual soil temperature below 0\u00b0C. Cryosols occupy much of the northern third of Canada. The great groups of the Cryosolic order are defined by two main criteria (1) the presence or absence of obvious cryoturbation, and (2) the nature of the parent material (mineral or organic). Organic Cryosol Great Group These soils have formed in organic parent material (i.e., material with >17% organic C by weight). They are similar to soils of the Organic order in terms of the diagnostic thickness of the organic layers, but they also have permafrost within 1 m of the surface. Generally, there is no evidence of cryoturbation in soils of this great group. Turbic Cryosol Great Group The soils of Turbic great group are characterized by the marked evidence of cryoturbation. Within the soil pit, this will appear as irregular or broken horizons and evidence of mixing of the horizons. At the soil surface, this may also appear as patterned ground. Given the instability associated with actively turbic sites, surface vegetation may be minimal or completely absent, with parent material evident right at the soil surface. Static Cryosol Great Group Static Cryosols are mineral soils without evidence of cryoturbation. They are distinguished from similar soils of other orders (such as Brunisols) by the presence of permafrost within 1 m of the surface. They commonly occur in association with the other two great groups but tend to be found in portions of the landscape with very coarse or recently deposited parent material and/or low moisture levels inhibit the development of turbic features. Leave a Reply Cancel replyYou must be logged in to post a comment. Soil Orders Brunisol Sombric (3) 1-01 Orthic Sombric Brunisol 1-02 Eluviated Sombric Brunisol 1-03 Gleyed Sombric Brunisol Melanic (5) 1-04 Orthic Melanic Brunisol 1-05 Orthic Melanic Brunisol 1-06 Orthic Melanic Brunisol 1-07 Orthic Melanic Brunisol 1-08 Gleyed Melanic Brunisol Eutric (11) 1-09 Orthic Eutric Brunisol 1-10 Orthic Eutric Brunisol 1-11 Orthic Eutric Brunisol 1-13 Orthic Eutric Brunisol 1-14 Orthic Eutric Brunisol 1-15 Orthic Eutric Brunisol 1-16 Eluviated Eutric Brunisol 1-17 Eluviated Eutric Brunisol 1-18 Eluviated Eutric Brunisol 1-19 Eluviated Eutric Brunisol 1-21 Degraded Eutric Brunisol Dystric (1) 1-20 Orthic Dystric Brunisol Chernozem Black (7) 2-01 Orthic Black Chernozem 2-02 Orthic Black Chernozem 2-03 Orthic Black Chernozem 2-05 Orthic Black Chernozem 2-06 Orthic Black Chernozem 2-07 Orthic Black Chernozem 2-08 Orthic Black Chernozem Dark Gray (5) 2-09 Orthic Dark Gray Chernozem 2-10 Orthic Dark Gray Chernozem 2-11 Orthic Dark Gray Chernozem 2-12 Rego Dark Gray Chernozem 2-16 Orthic Dark Gray Chernozem Brown (1) 2-13 Eluviated Brown Chernozem Dark Brown (1) 2-14 Orthic Dark Brown Chernozem Gleysol Luvic Gleysolic (3) 4-01 Humic Luvic Gleysol 4-04 Humic Luvic Gleysol 4-05 Humic Luvic Gleysol Humic Gleysolic (4) 4-02 Orthic Humic Gleysol 4-03 Orthic Humic Gleysol 4-06 Orthic Humic Gleysol 4-07 Fera Humic Gleysol Gleysolic (0) Luvisol Gray (48) 5-01 Podzolic Gray Luvisol 5-02 Podzolic Gray Luvisol 5-03 Podzolic Gray Luvisol 5-05 Podzolic Gray Luvisol 5-06 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-07 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-08 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-09 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-10 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-11 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-12 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-13 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-14 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-15 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-16 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-17 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-18 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-19 Podzolic Gray Luvisol 5-20 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-21 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-22 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-23 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-26 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-28 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-29 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-30 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-31 Orthic Dark Gray Luvisol 5-32 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-33 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-34 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-35 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-36 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-37 Gleyed Gray Luvisol 5-38 Gleyed Gray Luvisol 5-39 Gleyed Gray Luvisol 5-40 Gleyed Gray Luvisol 5-41 Podzolic Gray Luvisol 5-42 Gleyed Gray Luvisol 5-43 Gleyed Gray Luvisol 5-44 Gleyed Gray Luvisol 5-45 Dark Gray Luvisol 5-46 Dark Gray Luvisol 5-47 Dark Gray Luvisol 5-48 Dark Gray Luvisol 5-49 Dark Gray Luvisol 5-50 Dark Gray Luvisol 5-51 Dark Gray Luvisol 5-52 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-53 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-54 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-55 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-56 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-57 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-58 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-59 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-60 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-61 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-62 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol Gray Brown Luvisol (0) Solonetz Solonetz (2) 9-20 Dark Brown 9-21 Black Solonetz Solodized (1) 9-22 Orthic Black Solodized Solod (18) 9-01 Dark Gray Solod 9-02 Dark Gray Solod 9-03 Dark Gray Solod 9-05 Gray Solod 9-06 Gray Solod 9-07 Gray Solod 9-08 Gray Solod 9-09 Gray Solod 9-10 Gray Solod 9-11 Gray Solod 9-12 Gray Solod 9-13 Dark Brown Solod 9-14 Brown Solod 9-15 Brown Solod 9-16 Brown Solod 9-17 Brown Solod 9-18 Brown Solod 9-19 Black Solod Vertic Solonetz (0) Podzol Humo-Ferric (50) 7-01 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-02 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-03 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-04 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-05 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-06 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-07 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-08 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-09 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-10 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-11 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-12 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-13 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-14 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-15 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-16 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-17 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-18 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-19 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-20 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-21 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-22 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-23 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-24 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-25 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-26 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-27 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-28 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-30 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-31 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-32 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-33 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-34 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-35 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-36 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-37 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-38 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-39 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-40 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-41 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-42 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-43 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-44 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-45 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-46 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-47 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-48 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-49 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-50 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-51 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-52 Gleyed Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-53 Gleyed Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-55 Orstein Humo-Ferric Podzol Humic (2) 7-56 Orthic Humic Podzol 7-57 Orthic Humic Podzol Ferro-Humic (1) 7-54 Gleyed Humo-Ferric Podzol Organic Fibrisol (0) Mesisol (0) Humisol (1) 6-01 Terric Humisol Folisol (0) Regosol Humic (0) Regosol (5) 8-01 Orthic Regosol 8-02 Orthic Regosol 8-03 Cumulic Regosol 8-04 Cumulic Regosol 8-05 Cumulic Regosol Cryosol Organic (0) Turbic (0) Static (0) Vertisol Humic (0) Vertisol (0) Parent Material Index Proudly powered by WordPress", "History | Soil Monoliths Soil Monoliths Search Primary Menu Skip to content Home Site Content Brunisol Chernozem Gleysol Luvisol Solonetz Podzol Organic Regosol Cryosol Vertisol About About History Team Contact Tutorial How to Read a Soil Monolith Practice Questions Parent Material Index Resources Search for: History In British Columbia, exploratory soil inventories began in the 1920s as an inventory for the Canadian National Railway along the proposed route between Fraser Lake and Smithers in the Central Interior. This was followed by additional surveys around Prince George, the North Thompson, the Lower Fraser Valley, parts of southwestern Vancouver Island, and portions of the south Okanagan Valley. Dr. Charlie Rowles (2st on the right) is presenting a soil monolith to UBC\u2019s third president Dr. Norman MacKenzie in 1962. Soil survey was more formally established in the 1940s as a result of Federal-Provincial concerns about the development and settlement of various regions in the Province. Following the Second World War, Canada embarked on a most ambitious endeavor to establish an inventory of the soil resources of the vast country. In part this was to assess the various distribution and quality of Canada\u2019s soil resources to sustain agricultural productivity, improve soil management and thereby contribute to rural economic sustainability. There was some urgency, as veterans from the War were returning home and there were government incentives to develop new settlement regions. The Soil Inventory program in British Columbia began in earnest in the 1940s. Mr. Laurie Farstad, British Columbia\u2019s first pedologist and Head of the Federal Soil Survey Unit was a keen student of soil formation and had a passion to make soil information available to University students and to important groups of professionals \u2013 foresters, agricultural extension personnel, and municipal planners. Laurie Farstad and UBC\u2019s first Soil Science Professor, Dr. David Laird initiated the collection of soil monoliths in the priority areas where soil surveys were being conducted in the 1960s. One of Mr. Farstad\u2019s staff members, Mr. Alex Green became the \u201cmaster\u201d of soil monolith preparation, who by his meticulous attention to detail, set the standards for the unique UBC collection. As soil inventory programs expanded across British Columbia, soil monoliths were a part of the program, not so much as a requirement but one of interest and enthusiasm. The UBC soil monolith collection was expanded to a limited extent beyond British Columbia to neighboring Alberta to include \u201ctrue\u201d prairie Chernozems and to Yukon to illustrate effects of cryoturbation. Dr. David Laird (one of two people who initiated the collection of soil monoliths at UBC) The first permanently mounted monoliths (collected in the 1960s) were from the Peace River and Prince George regions of the province, followed by collections from the East Kootenay\u2019s (Rocky Mountain Trench), Vancouver Island, and the Lower mainland in the 1970s. The out of province and museum collections took place in the 1970-80s. Although Mr. Alex Green continued to make contributions to monolith preparation, increasingly his role was that of the \u201cartistic\u201d advisor. Several students working on the provincial soil survey, as well as government field pedologists and UBC faculty continued to add to the collection up to the 1990s.The Department of Soil Science at UBC played a major role in continuing and maintaining the collection and maintained a multipurpose teaching and pedolarium in the MacMillan Building (room 154). As a result of Faculty reorganization in the late 1990s, the monolith collection was scattered among various locations in the Macmillan Building. Recent initiatives by Dr. Maja Krzic has been successful in restoring and relocating the collection back to MacMillan 154. The monolith collection makes a significant contribution in the teaching of introductory Soil Science course and was an integral component in the teaching of Pedology course. It is the second largest University collection in Canada. Monoliths collected by pedologists in British Columbia are also on display at natural museums in Victoria (provincial) and Ottawa (federal) as well as at the International Congress Soil Monolith Collection at the University of Alberta, in Edmonton. Here is the process which was used to prepare the UBC\u2019s monolith collection. 1-tools-needed 2-cutting_the_monolyth 3-encasing_the_monolith 4-removing_soft_monolith 5-lab-equipment-needed 6-applying-resin 7-surface_prep 8-removing-monolith 9-voila Leave a Reply Cancel replyYou must be logged in to post a comment. Soil Orders Brunisol Sombric (3) 1-01 Orthic Sombric Brunisol 1-02 Eluviated Sombric Brunisol 1-03 Gleyed Sombric Brunisol Melanic (5) 1-04 Orthic Melanic Brunisol 1-05 Orthic Melanic Brunisol 1-06 Orthic Melanic Brunisol 1-07 Orthic Melanic Brunisol 1-08 Gleyed Melanic Brunisol Eutric (11) 1-09 Orthic Eutric Brunisol 1-10 Orthic Eutric Brunisol 1-11 Orthic Eutric Brunisol 1-13 Orthic Eutric Brunisol 1-14 Orthic Eutric Brunisol 1-15 Orthic Eutric Brunisol 1-16 Eluviated Eutric Brunisol 1-17 Eluviated Eutric Brunisol 1-18 Eluviated Eutric Brunisol 1-19 Eluviated Eutric Brunisol 1-21 Degraded Eutric Brunisol Dystric (1) 1-20 Orthic Dystric Brunisol Chernozem Black (7) 2-01 Orthic Black Chernozem 2-02 Orthic Black Chernozem 2-03 Orthic Black Chernozem 2-05 Orthic Black Chernozem 2-06 Orthic Black Chernozem 2-07 Orthic Black Chernozem 2-08 Orthic Black Chernozem Dark Gray (5) 2-09 Orthic Dark Gray Chernozem 2-10 Orthic Dark Gray Chernozem 2-11 Orthic Dark Gray Chernozem 2-12 Rego Dark Gray Chernozem 2-16 Orthic Dark Gray Chernozem Brown (1) 2-13 Eluviated Brown Chernozem Dark Brown (1) 2-14 Orthic Dark Brown Chernozem Gleysol Luvic Gleysolic (3) 4-01 Humic Luvic Gleysol 4-04 Humic Luvic Gleysol 4-05 Humic Luvic Gleysol Humic Gleysolic (4) 4-02 Orthic Humic Gleysol 4-03 Orthic Humic Gleysol 4-06 Orthic Humic Gleysol 4-07 Fera Humic Gleysol Gleysolic (0) Luvisol Gray (48) 5-01 Podzolic Gray Luvisol 5-02 Podzolic Gray Luvisol 5-03 Podzolic Gray Luvisol 5-05 Podzolic Gray Luvisol 5-06 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-07 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-08 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-09 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-10 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-11 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-12 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-13 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-14 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-15 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-16 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-17 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-18 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-19 Podzolic Gray Luvisol 5-20 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-21 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-22 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-23 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-26 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-28 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-29 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-30 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-31 Orthic Dark Gray Luvisol 5-32 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-33 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-34 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-35 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-36 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-37 Gleyed Gray Luvisol 5-38 Gleyed Gray Luvisol 5-39 Gleyed Gray Luvisol 5-40 Gleyed Gray Luvisol 5-41 Podzolic Gray Luvisol 5-42 Gleyed Gray Luvisol 5-43 Gleyed Gray Luvisol 5-44 Gleyed Gray Luvisol 5-45 Dark Gray Luvisol 5-46 Dark Gray Luvisol 5-47 Dark Gray Luvisol 5-48 Dark Gray Luvisol 5-49 Dark Gray Luvisol 5-50 Dark Gray Luvisol 5-51 Dark Gray Luvisol 5-52 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-53 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-54 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-55 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-56 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-57 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-58 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-59 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-60 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-61 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-62 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol Gray Brown Luvisol (0) Solonetz Solonetz (2) 9-20 Dark Brown 9-21 Black Solonetz Solodized (1) 9-22 Orthic Black Solodized Solod (18) 9-01 Dark Gray Solod 9-02 Dark Gray Solod 9-03 Dark Gray Solod 9-05 Gray Solod 9-06 Gray Solod 9-07 Gray Solod 9-08 Gray Solod 9-09 Gray Solod 9-10 Gray Solod 9-11 Gray Solod 9-12 Gray Solod 9-13 Dark Brown Solod 9-14 Brown Solod 9-15 Brown Solod 9-16 Brown Solod 9-17 Brown Solod 9-18 Brown Solod 9-19 Black Solod Vertic Solonetz (0) Podzol Humo-Ferric (50) 7-01 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-02 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-03 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-04 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-05 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-06 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-07 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-08 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-09 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-10 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-11 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-12 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-13 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-14 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-15 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-16 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-17 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-18 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-19 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-20 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-21 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-22 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-23 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-24 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-25 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-26 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-27 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-28 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-30 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-31 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-32 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-33 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-34 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-35 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-36 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-37 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-38 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-39 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-40 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-41 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-42 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-43 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-44 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-45 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-46 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-47 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-48 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-49 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-50 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-51 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-52 Gleyed Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-53 Gleyed Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-55 Orstein Humo-Ferric Podzol Humic (2) 7-56 Orthic Humic Podzol 7-57 Orthic Humic Podzol Ferro-Humic (1) 7-54 Gleyed Humo-Ferric Podzol Organic Fibrisol (0) Mesisol (0) Humisol (1) 6-01 Terric Humisol Folisol (0) Regosol Humic (0) Regosol (5) 8-01 Orthic Regosol 8-02 Orthic Regosol 8-03 Cumulic Regosol 8-04 Cumulic Regosol 8-05 Cumulic Regosol Cryosol Organic (0) Turbic (0) Static (0) Vertisol Humic (0) Vertisol (0) Parent Material Index Proudly powered by WordPress", "Creosol | Define Creosol at Dictionary.com Dictionary.comThesaurus.comEverything After ZWord of the DayVideoWord FactsGrammarCrossword SolverDaily CrosswordAll The WordsSlangEmojiGender & SexualityAcronymsDictionary.comThesaurus.comTry Our AppsdefinitionsSearchsynonymscreosol[kree-uh-sawl, -sol]WORD ORIGINnoun Chemistry.a colorless oily liquid, C8H10O2, having an agreeable odor and a burning taste, obtained from wood tar and guaiacum resin: used as a disinfectant, in the manufacture of resins, and in ore flotation.Explore Dictionary.comThe Word Possible Changes HeadlinesCan You Translate These Famous Phrases From Emoji?These Are the Longest Words in EnglishThese Are the Saddest Phrases in EnglishOrigin of creosolFirst recorded in 1860\u201365; creos(ote) + -ol2Dictionary.com Unabridged Based on the Random House Unabridged Dictionary, \u00a9 Random House, Inc. 2019British Dictionary definitions for creosolcreosolnouna colourless or pale yellow insoluble oily liquid with a smoky odour and a burning taste; 2-methoxy-4-methylphenol: an active principle of creosote. Formula: CH 3 O(CH 3)C 6 H 3 OHShow MoreWord Origin for creosolC19: from creos (ote) + -ol 1Collins English Dictionary - Complete & Unabridged 2012 Digital Edition \u00a9 William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd. 1979, 1986 \u00a9 HarperCollins Publishers 1998, 2000, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2012Others Are ReadingWhat Does Gender Really Mean?The Year's Top Word TrendsWord of the DayvolubleWords We Get Wrong: How Many of These Can You Say?Did You Know Real People Write the Dictionary?Nearby words for creosolcreole-fishcreolizecreolizedcreoncreophagouscreosolcreosotecreosote bushcrepecrepe de chinecrepe hairBrowse the Dictionary:#ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZBrowse by Category:SlangEmojiAcronymsPop CultureMoreAboutCareersContact UsCookies, Terms, & Privacy\u00a9 2019 Dictionary.com, LLC", "Publications - CryoSol World HomeVitroJetNewsEventsPublicationsAboutContact Select Page PublicationsRelevant publicationsAlvarez, F. J., He, S., Perilla, J. R., Jang, S., Schulten, K., Engelman, A. N., ... & Zhang, P. (2017). CryoEM structure of MxB reveals a novel oligomerization interface critical for HIV restriction.\u00a0Science Advances,\u00a03(9), e1701264.Human dynamin-like, interferon-induced myxovirus resistance 2 (Mx2 or MxB) is a potent HIV-1 inhibitor. Antiviral activity requires both the amino-terminal region of MxB and protein oligomerization, each of which has eluded structural determination due to difficulties in protein preparation. We report that maltose binding protein-fused, full-length wild-type MxB purifies as oligomers and further self-assembles into helical arrays in physiological salt. Guanosine triphosphate (GTP), but not guanosine diphosphate, binding results in array disassembly, whereas subsequent GTP hydrolysis allows its reformation. Using cryo-electron microscopy (cryoEM), we determined the MxB assembly structure at 4.6 \u00c5 resolution, representing the first near-atomic resolution structure in the mammalian dynamin superfamily. The structure revealed previously described and novel MxB assembly interfaces. Mutational analyses demonstrated a critical role for one of the novel interfaces in HIV-1 restriction.Cheng, Y. (2018). Single-particle cryo-EM\u2014How did it get here and where will it go. Science, 361(6405), 876-880.Cryo\u2013electron microscopy, or simply cryo-EM, refers mainly to three very different yet closely related techniques: electron crystallography, single-particle cryo-EM, and electron cryotomography. In the past few years, single-particle cryo-EM in particular has triggered a revolution in structural biology and has become a newly dominant discipline. This Review examines the fascinating story of its start and evolution over the past 40-plus years, delves into how and why the recent technological advances have been so groundbreaking, and briefly considers where the technique may be headed in the future.D'Imprima, E., D. Floris, M. Joppe, R. S\u00e1nchez, M. Grininger and W. K\u00fchlbrandt (2018). \"The deadly touch: protein denaturation at the water-air interface and how to prevent it.\" bioRxiv: 400432.Electron cryo-microscopy analyzes the structure of proteins and protein complexes in vitrified solution. Proteins tend to adsorb to the air-water interface in unsupported films of aqueous solution, which can result in partial or complete denaturation of the protein. We investigated the structure of yeast fatty acid synthase at the air-water interface by electron cryo-tomography and single-particle image processing. Around 90% of complexes adsorbed to the air-water interface are partly denatured. We show that the unfolded regions are those facing the air-water interface. Denaturation by contact with air may happen at any stage of specimen preparation. Denaturation at the air-water interface is completely avoided when the complex is plunge-frozen on a substrate of hydrophilized graphene.Drulyte, I., Johnson, R. M., Hesketh, E. L., Hurdiss, D. L., Scarff, C. A., Porav, S. A., ... & Thompson, R. F. (2018). Approaches to altering particle distributions in cryo-electron microscopy sample preparation. Acta Crystallographica Section D: Structural Biology, 74(6).Cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) can now be used to determine high-resolution structural information on a diverse range of biological specimens. Recent advances have been driven primarily by developments in microscopes and detectors, and through advances in image-processing software. However, for many single-particle cryo-EM projects, major bottlenecks currently remain at the sample-preparation stage; obtaining cryo-EM grids of sufficient quality for high-resolution single-particle analysis can require the careful optimization of many variables. Common hurdles to overcome include problems associated with the sample itself (buffer components, labile complexes), sample distribution (obtaining the correct concentration, affinity for the support film), preferred orientation, and poor reproducibility of the grid-making process within and between batches. This review outlines a number of methodologies used within the electron-microscopy community to address these challenges, providing a range of approaches which may aid in obtaining optimal grids for high-resolution data collection.von der Ecken, J., Heissler, S. M., Pathan-Chhatbar, S., Manstein, D. J., & Raunser, S. (2016). Cryo-EM structure of a human cytoplasmic actomyosin complex at near-atomic resolution. Nature, 534(7609), 724.The interaction of myosin with actin filaments is the central feature of muscle contraction\u00a0and cargo movement along actin filaments of the cytoskeleton. The energy for these movements is generated during a complex mechanochemical reaction cycle. Crystal structures of myosin in different states have provided important structural insights into the myosin motor cycle when myosin is detached from F-actin. The difficulty of obtaining diffracting crystals, however, has prevented structure determination by crystallography of actomyosin complexes. Thus, although structural models exist of F-actin in complex with various myosins, a high-resolution structure of the F-actin\u2013myosin complex is missing. Here, using electron cryomicroscopy, we present the structure of a human rigor actomyosin complex at an average resolution of 3.9\u2009\u00c5. The structure reveals details of the actomyosin interface, which is mainly stabilized by hydrophobic interactions. The negatively charged amino (N) terminus of actin interacts with a conserved basic motif in loop 2 of myosin, promoting cleft closure in myosin. Surprisingly, the overall structure of myosin is similar to rigor-like myosin structures in the absence of F-actin, indicating that F-actin binding induces only minimal conformational changes in myosin. A comparison with pre-powerstroke and intermediate (Pi-release)\u00a0states of myosin allows us to discuss the general mechanism of myosin binding to F-actin. Our results serve as a strong foundation for the molecular understanding of cytoskeletal diseases, such as autosomal dominant hearing loss and diseases affecting skeletal and cardiac muscles, in particular nemaline myopathy and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.Frederik, P. M. and D. H. W. Hubert (2005). \"Methods in Enzymology.\" 391: 431-448.A thin aqueous film of suspended\u00a0lipid\u00a0vesicles\u29f8micelles is the object of choice for\u00a0vitrification\u00a0and subsequent study by\u00a0cryoelectron microscopy. Just prior to vitrification, a thin film (compare with a soap film) is vulnerable to heat and mass exchange. Preparation of thin films in a temperature- and humidity-controlled environment is essential to prevent osmotic and temperature-induced alterations of the lipid structure, as will be explained in this chapter. Further automation of the preparative procedure by automatic blotting and PC control over the timing of critical steps (including vitrification) may further assist in the reproducible throughput of high-quality specimens. By cryotomography, taking a tilt series under low-dose conditions, a\u00a0three-dimensional reconstruction\u00a0of the specimen can be analyzed.Kuhlbrandt, W. (2014). \"Biochemistry. The resolution revolution.\" Science 343(6178): 1443-1444.Liu, Z., Wang, J., Cheng, H., Ke, X., Sun, L., Zhang, Q. C., & Wang, H. W. (2018). Cryo-EM Structure of Human Dicer and Its Complexes with a Pre-miRNA Substrate. Cell, 173(5), 1191-1203.Human\u00a0Dicer\u00a0(hDicer) is a multi-domain protein belonging to the\u00a0RNase III\u00a0family. It plays pivotal roles\u00a0in\u00a0small RNA\u00a0biogenesis during the\u00a0RNA interference\u00a0(RNAi) pathway by processing a diverse range of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) precursors to generate \u223c22 nt\u00a0microRNA\u00a0(miRNA) or\u00a0small interfering RNA\u00a0(siRNA) products for sequence-directed\u00a0gene silencing. In this work, we solved the\u00a0cryoelectron microscopy\u00a0(cryo-EM) structure of hDicer in complex with its\u00a0cofactor\u00a0protein\u00a0TRBP\u00a0and revealed the precise spatial arrangement of hDicer\u2019s multiple\u00a0domains. We further solved structures of the hDicer-TRBP complex bound with pre-let-7 RNA in two distinct conformations. In combination with biochemical analysis, these structures reveal a property of the hDicer-TRBP complex to promote the stability of pre-miRNA\u2019s stem duplex in a pre-dicing state. These results provide insights into the\u00a0mechanism of\u00a0RNA processing\u00a0by hDicer and illustrate the regulatory role of hDicer\u2019s\u00a0N-terminal\u00a0helicase\u00a0domain.Passmore, L. A. and C. J. Russo (2016). \"Specimen preparation for high-resolution cryo-EM.\" Methods in enzymology 579: 51-86.Imaging a material with electrons at near-atomic resolution requires a thin specimen that is stable in the vacuum of the transmission\u00a0electron microscope. For biological samples, this comprises a thin layer of frozen\u00a0aqueous solution\u00a0containing the\u00a0biomolecular complex\u00a0of interest. The process of preparing a high-quality specimen is often the limiting step in the determination of structures by single-particle\u00a0electron cryomicroscopy\u00a0(cryo-EM). Here, we describe a systematic approach for going from a purified biomolecular complex in aqueous solution to high-resolution electron micrographs that are suitable for 3D\u00a0structure determination. This includes a series of protocols for the preparation of\u00a0vitrified\u00a0specimens on various supports, including all-gold and\u00a0graphene. We also describe techniques for troubleshooting when a preparation fails to yield suitable specimens, and common mistakes to avoid during each part of the process. Finally, we include recommendations for obtaining the highest quality micrographs from prepared specimens with current microscope, detector, and support technology.Sun, F. (2018). Orienting the future of bio-macromolecular electron microscopy. Chinese Physics B, 27(6), 063601.With 40 years of development, bio-macromolecule cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) has completed its revolution in terms of resolution and currently plays a highly important role in structural biology study. According to different specimen states, cryo-EM involves three specific techniques: single-particle analysis (SPA), electron tomography and subtomogram averaging, and electron diffraction. None of these three techniques have realized their full potential for solving the structures of bio-macromolecules and therefore need additional development. In this review, the current existing bottlenecks of cryo-EM SPA are discussed with theoretical analysis, which include the air\u2013water interface during specimen cryo-vitrification, bio-macromolecular conformational heterogeneity, focus gradient within thick specimens, and electron radiation damage. Furthermore, potential solutions of these bottlenecks worthy of further investigation are proposed and discussed. Cryosol WorldHomeVitroJetPublicationsAboutContactLatest News CryoSol-World welcomes Frank Nijpels as a new team member Diekirch-Valkenswaard bicycle tour Proof-of-principle of the VitroJet CryoSol-World is foundedView All NewsUpcoming Events Journ\u00e9e Roger Monier, Institut Curie, Paris, France, April 5, 2019 April 5 CCP-EM Spring Symposium, Nottingham University, April 29 \u2013 May 1, 2019 April 29 @ 8:00 am - May 1 @ 5:00 pm iNext workshop on Integrated Methodologies and Approaches for Structural Biology, Brno, Czech Republic, May 29 \u2013 31, 2019 May 29 @ 8:00 am - May 31 @ 5:00 pm View All Events", "cryosol - Wiktionary cryosol Definition from Wiktionary, the free dictionary Jump to navigation Jump to search English[edit] Etymology[edit] cryo- +\u200e -sol Noun[edit] cryosol (plural cryosols) A gelisol. Retrieved from \"https://en.wiktionary.org/w/index.php?title=cryosol&oldid=47370592\" Categories: English words prefixed with cryo-English words suffixed with -solEnglish lemmasEnglish nounsEnglish countable nouns Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces EntryDiscussion Variants Views ReadEditHistory More Search Navigation Main PageCommunity portalPreferencesRequested entriesRecent changesRandom entryHelpGlossaryDonationsContact us Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationCite this page In other languages Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version This page was last edited on 29 August 2017, at 16:06. Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Privacy policy About\u00a0Wiktionary Disclaimers Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "Creosol - Wikipedia Creosol From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search Not to be confused with cresol. Creosol Names IUPAC name 2-Methoxy-4-methylphenol Other names 4-Methylguaiacol; Valspice Identifiers CAS Number 93-51-6\u00a0Y 3D model (JSmol) Interactive image ChemSpider 21105936\u00a0Y ECHA InfoCard 100.002.049 PubChem CID 7144 UNII W9GW1KZG6N\u00a0Y InChI InChI=1S/C8H10O2/c1-6-3-4-7(9)8(5-6)10-2/h3-5,9H,1-2H3\u00a0YKey:\u00a0PETRWTHZSKVLRE-UHFFFAOYSA-N\u00a0YInChI=1/C8H10O2/c1-6-3-4-7(9)8(5-6)10-2/h3-5,9H,1-2H3Key:\u00a0PETRWTHZSKVLRE-UHFFFAOYAK SMILES Oc1ccc(C)cc1OC Properties Chemical formula C8H10O2 Molar mass 138.16 g/mol Appearance Colorless to yellowish aromatic liquid Density 1.092 g/cm3 Melting point 5.5\u00a0\u00b0C (41.9\u00a0\u00b0F; 278.6\u00a0K) Boiling point 220\u00a0\u00b0C (428\u00a0\u00b0F; 493\u00a0K) Solubility in water Slightly soluble Solubility in ethanol, ether, benzene Miscible Except where otherwise noted, data are given for materials in their standard state (at 25\u00a0\u00b0C [77\u00a0\u00b0F], 100\u00a0kPa). Y\u00a0verify\u00a0(what is\u00a0YN\u00a0?) Infobox\u00a0references Creosol is a chemical compound with the molecular formula C8H10O2. It is one of the components of creosote. Compared with phenol, creosol is a less toxic disinfectant. Contents 1 Sources 2 Reactions 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Sources[edit] Sources of creosol include: Coal tar creosote Wood creosote Reduction product of vanillin using zinc powder in strong hydrochloric acid Found as glycosides in green vanilla beans[1] It is also found in tequila.[2] Reactions[edit] Creosol reacts with hydrogen halides to give a catechol. See also[edit] Vanillin, a related phenol References[edit] ^ Dignum, Mark J.W.; Van Der Heijden, Rob; Kerler, Josef; Winkel, Chris; Verpoorte, Rob (2004). \"Identification of glucosides in green beans of Vanilla planifolia Andrews and kinetics of vanilla \u03b2-glucosidase\". Food Chemistry. 85 (2): 199\u2013205. doi:10.1016/S0308-8146(03)00293-0. ^ Characterization of volatile compounds from ethnic Agave alcoholic beverages by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. Le\u00f3n-Rodr\u00edguez, A. de, Escalante-Minakata, P., Jim\u00e9nez-Garc\u00eda, M. I., Ordo\u00f1ez-Acevedo, L. G., Flores Flores, J. L. and Barba de la Rosa, A. P., Food Technology and Biotechnology, 2008, Volume 46, Number 4, pages 448-455 (abstract) External links[edit] Media related to Creosol at Wikimedia Commons Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Creosol&oldid=854880265\" Categories: AntisepticsPhenol ethersAlkylphenolsHidden categories: Articles without EBI sourceArticles without KEGG sourceECHA InfoCard ID from WikidataArticles containing unverified chemical infoboxesChembox image size setCommons category link is on Wikidata Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces ArticleTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Languages \u0627\u0644\u0639\u0631\u0628\u064a\u0629\u062a\u06c6\u0631\u06a9\u062c\u0647\u010ce\u0161tinaDeutschEspa\u00f1olEsperanto\u0641\u0627\u0631\u0633\u06ccItalianoPolskiPortugu\u00eas\u0421\u0440\u043f\u0441\u043a\u0438 / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / \u0441\u0440\u043f\u0441\u043a\u043e\u0445\u0440\u0432\u0430\u0442\u0441\u043a\u0438 Edit links This page was last edited on 14 August 2018, at 12:26\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "Cryosol dictionary definition | cryosol defined Definitions cryosolNoun (plural cryosols)A gelisol. English Wiktionary. Available under\u00a0CC-BY-SA\u00a0license. Link/Cite Link to this page Cite this page MLA Style \"cryosol.\" YourDictionary, n.d. Web. 26 February 2019. <https://www.yourdictionary.com/cryosol>. APA Style cryosol. (n.d.). Retrieved February 26th, 2019, from https://www.yourdictionary.com/cryosol Dictionary Thesaurus Examples See in a sentence Example articles Quotes Famous Quotes Quote Articles Spanish Spanish-English Translation Reference Reference Education ESL Grammar Abbreviations Biography Books & Literature Examples Foreign Languages Resources Slideshows Word\u00a0Finder Word\u00a0Finder 4 Pics 1 Word Answers Anagram Solver Unscramble Word Cookies Cheat Word Game Dictionary Word Unscrambler Words With Friends Cheat Share DEFINITIONS Dictionary Thesaurus Examples See in a sentence Example articles Quotes Famous Quotes Quote Articles Spanish Spanish-English Translation Reference Reference Education ESL Grammar Abbreviations Biography Books & Literature Examples Foreign Languages Resources Slideshows Word\u00a0Finder Word\u00a0Finder 4 Pics 1 Word Answers Anagram Solver Unscramble Word Cookies Cheat Word Game Dictionary Word Unscrambler Words With Friends Cheat Share Home Dictionary Definitionscryosol Also Mentioned In cryosols WORDS NEAR cryosol IN THE DICTIONARY cryoseismscryosequestercryosequestrationcryosleepcryosolcryosoliccryosolscryosolventcryospherecryospheric Scrabble\u00ae points: 12 More on Word Finder \u2192 Follow YourDictionary Get our free Amazon Alexa Skills! Join YourDictionary today Yes, I'd like to receive Word of the Day emails from YourDictionary.com By continuing, you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Please set a username for yourself. People will see it as Author Name with your public flash cards. Username:", "Viscol Viscol Lubricans Dil Se\u00e7enekleri: T\u00fcrk\u00e7e | \u0130leti\u015fim TR | EN | Login About Viscol About Us Viscol S.p.A. Italy Our Mission Our Certificate Contract Manufacturing Export Activities Our Products Hydraulic System Oils Turbine Oils Heat Transfer And Heat Treatment Oils Way Lubricants Industrial Gear Oils Cylinder Oils General Machinery And Circulating Oils Compressor Oils Pneumatic System And Drilling Tool Oils Metalworking Fluids Cold Forming Oils Hot Forming Oils Rust Preventives Glass Processing Oils Textile Oils Transformer And Insulating Oils Process Oils Mould Release Agents Open Gear And Wire Rope Lubricants Miscellaneous Industrial Oils Marine Lubricants Automotive Lubricants Greases And Pastes Surface Technology Chemicals Cleaners Applications Wood Industry Glass Industry Cement Industry Maritime Sector Iron-Steel and Metallurgy Industries Energy Sector Food and Pharmaceutical Industries Construction Industry Rubber and Plastic Industries Metalworking Industry Textile Industry Technical Support Technical Support and Laboratory Services Lubricants Glossary Viscosity Classification Tables\u0131 Technical and Material Safety Datasheets\u0131 Metalworking Fluids Information Charts Rust Preventives Information Chart Cross Reference Charts News Useful Links Career Contact Our Products Hydraulic System Oils Turbine Oils Heat Transfer And Heat Treatment Oils Way Lubricants Industrial Gear Oils Cylinder Oils General Machinery And Circulating Oils Compressor Oils Pneumatic System And Drilling Tool Oils Metalworking Fluids Cold Forming Oils Hot Forming Oils Rust Preventives Glass Processing Oils Textile Oils Transformer And Insulating Oils Process Oils Mould Release Agents Open Gear And Wire Rope Lubricants Miscellaneous Industrial Oils Marine Lubricants Automotive Lubricants Greases And Pastes Surface Technology Chemicals Cleaners Cryosol Cryosol CRYOSOL S 100 Water soluble, synthetic based, high technology\u00a0metalworking, cooling, cleaning and protective fluid. It\u00a0can be used in a wide spectrum including central\u00a0systems to CNCs, from different types of cast iron to\u00a0aluminium and steel alloys. Anti-corrosion, anti-foam\u00a0and bactericide ingredients provide stable emulsion\u00a0while detergency additives keep the benches clean. Its\u00a0high lubricity feature increases the tool life. CRYOSOL S 200 Water soluble, synthetic based metalworking and\u00a0cutting fluid with extremely high corrosion resistance.\u00a0Provides very long sump life thanks to the bactericide\u00a0and fungicide it contains. It has flushing feature along\u00a0withhigh lubricity. Mainly used for the machining of cast\u00a0steel, medium hard steel and non-ferrous metals. Also\u00a0keeps the materials clean and rust free. EP version with\u00a0enhanced load carrying capacity and green colored G\u00a0version is also available. CRYOSOL S 315 High technology, water soluble, synthetic based\u00a0biostable metalworking and cooling fluid. It can be used\u00a0in a wide spectrum including central systems to CNCs,\u00a0machining of iron materials to grinding. Its high cooling\u00a0power provides superior lubricity. Does not include\u00a0chlorine, phenol and nitrite. CRYOSOL S 516 General purpose, high performance, water soluble\u00a0coolant used in machining of iron, aluminium andyellow\u00a0metals. Produced for high pressure cooling and\u00a0lubricating systems. Includes special inhibitor for\u00a0trouble-free working with yellow metals. CRYOSOL S 600 Soluble cutting fluid that forms a white opaque emulsion\u00a0when mixed with water. Does not include phenol and\u00a0nitrite. Consists of synthetic carriers with low sulfur level,\u00a0appropriate additive package thatprovides corrosion\u00a0protection, lubricity and emulsion forming. It forms an\u00a0extremely stable emulsion that protects the tools against\u00a0corrosion. It also has cooling and lubricating features About us \u2022Viscol S.p.A. Italy \u2022Our Mission \u2022Our Certificate \u2022Contract Manufacturing \u2022Export Activities Our Products \u2022Hydraulic System Oils \u2022Turbine Oils \u2022Heat Transfer And Heat Treatment Oils \u2022Way Lubricants \u2022Industrial Gear Oils \u2022Cylinder Oils \u2022General Machinery And Circulating Oils \u2022Compressor Oils \u2022Pneumatic System And Drilling Tool Oils \u2022Metalworking Fluids \u2022Cold Forming Oils \u2022Hot Forming Oils \u2022Cryosol \u2022Rust Preventives \u2022Glass Processing Oils \u2022\u2022Textile Oils \u2022Transformer And Insulating Oils \u2022Process Oils \u2022Mould Release Agents \u2022Open Gear And Wire Rope Lubricants \u2022Miscellaneous Industrial Oils \u2022Marine Lubricants \u2022Automotive Lubricants \u2022Greases And Pastes \u2022Surface Technology Chemicals \u2022Cleaners Applications \u2022Wood Industry \u2022Glass Industry \u2022Cement Industry \u2022Maritime Sector \u2022Iron-Steel and Metallurgy Industries \u2022Energy Sector \u2022Food and Pharmaceutical Industries \u2022Construction Industry \u2022Rubber and Plastic Industries \u2022Metalworking Industry \u2022Textile Industry Technical Support \u2022Technical Support and Laboratory Services \u2022Lubricants Glossary \u2022Viscosity Classification Tables\u0131 \u2022Technical and Material Safety Datasheets\u0131 \u2022Metalworking Fluids Information Charts \u2022Rust Preventives Information Chart \u2022Cross Reference Charts Contact Viscol Petrokimya San. ve Tic. A.\u015e. Address : \u0130stanbul Tuzla Kimya Sanayicileri Organize Sanayi B\u00f6lgesi, Melek Aras Bulvar\u0131, Kristal Caddesi, No: 6, Tepe\u00f6ren - Tuzla - \u0130stanbul / T\u00dcRK\u0130YE Phone : +90 216 593 03 65 \u2013 66 (pbx) Fax : +90 216 593 03 21 E-Mail : info@viscol.com.tr \u00a9 Copyright 2012 Viscol Lubricants. All rights reserved.", "Cryosol | SpringerLink Skip to main content Skip to table of contents This service is more advanced with JavaScript available, learn more at http://activatejavascript.org SpringerLink Search SpringerLink Search Home Log in Encyclopedia of Snow, Ice and Glaciers 2011 Edition | Editors: Vijay\u00a0P.\u00a0Singh, Pratap\u00a0Singh, Umesh\u00a0K.\u00a0Haritashya Contents Search CryosolAuthorsAuthors and affiliationsP.\u00a0Pradeep\u00a0KumarReference work entryFirst Online: 26 August 2014DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-90-481-2642-2_91 5 Readers 142 Downloads How to cite Definition Soil formed either in mineral or organic materials having permafrost either within 1 m below the surface or if the soil is strongly cryoturbated, the 2 m below surface and having a mean annual ground temperature below 0\u00b0C. Cryosol are also referred to the pumpable mixtures of brine and ice (ice slurries) used for coolants in cold storage equipments. BibliographyChristian, D., and Falk, M., 2003. Cold transport and cold storage with cryosol. Euroheat & Power, 32(10), 34\u201339.Google ScholarJackson, J. A., Mehl, J. P., and Neuendorf, K. K. E., 2005. Glossary of Geology. Berlin: Springer Science & Business, p. 779. ISBN 0922152764, 9780922152766. (American Geological Institute, Contributor Klaus K. E. Neuendorf.)Google ScholarNational Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC), http://nsidc.org/cgi-bin/words/letter.pl?C Copyright information\u00a9\u00a0Springer Science+Business Media B.V.\u00a02011Authors and AffiliationsP.\u00a0Pradeep\u00a0Kumar1Email author1.Department of Atmospheric and Space SciencesPune UniversityPuneIndia How to cite Cite this entry as: Kumar P.P. (2011) Cryosol. In: Singh V.P., Singh P., Haritashya U.K. (eds) Encyclopedia of Snow, Ice and Glaciers. Encyclopedia of Earth Sciences Series. Springer, Dordrecht .RIS Papers Reference Manager RefWorks Zotero .ENW EndNote .BIB BibTeX JabRef Mendeley About this entry First Online 26 August 2014 DOI https://doi.org/10.1007/978-90-481-2642-2 Publisher Name Springer, Dordrecht Print ISBN 978-90-481-2641-5 Online ISBN 978-90-481-2642-2 eBook Packages Earth and Environmental Science Buy this book on publisher's site Reprints and Permissions Search book Search within book Type for suggestions Table of contents Previous Page 4 Navigate to page number of 24 Next About this reference work Introduction Editors and affiliations Bibliographic information C Crevasses Critical Temperature Crush Crust Cryoconite Cryodessication Cryofront Cryogenesis Cryogenic Aquiclude Cryogenic Fabric Cryolithology Cryopeg Cryosol Cryostatic Pressure Cryostructure Cryoturbation D Dating Glacial Landforms Dead Ice Debris Debris Thermal Properties and Impact on Ice Ablation Over 10 million scientific documents at your fingertips Switch Edition Academic Edition Corporate Edition Home Impressum Legal information Privacy statement How we use cookies Accessibility Contact us Springer Nature \u00a9 2018 Springer Nature Switzerland AG. Part of Springer Nature. Not logged in Not affiliated 75.166.229.92", "Gelisol - Wikipedia Gelisol From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia \u00a0\u00a0(Redirected from Cryosol) Jump to navigation Jump to search Gelisola Gelisol profileUsed inUSDA soil taxonomyProfileOACKey processcryoturbationParent materialpeat, otherClimatesubarctic, tundra Gelisols are an order in USDA soil taxonomy. They are soils of very cold climates which are defined as containing permafrost within two meters of the soil surface. The word \"Gelisol\" comes from the Latin gelare meaning \"to freeze\", a reference to the process of cryoturbation that occurs from the alternating thawing and freezing characteristic of Gelisols. In the World Reference Base for Soil Resources[1] (WRB), Gelisols are known as Cryosols. In soil taxonomy, Gelisols key out before the Histosols. In the WRB, the Histosols key out before the Cryosols. Organic permafrost soils are therefore Gelisols (Histels) in the soil taxonomy and Histosols (Cryic Histosols) in the WRB. Structurally, Gelisols may have a B horizon and more commonly have an A horizon and/or O horizon resting on the permafrost. Because soil organic matter accumulates in the upper layer, most Gelisols are black or dark brown in soil color, followed by a shallow mineral layer. Despite the influence of glaciation in most areas where Gelisols occur, chemically they are not highly fertile because nutrients, especially calcium and potassium, are very easily leached above the permafrost. The permafrost greatly restricts the engineering use of Gelisols, as large structures (e.g. buildings) subside as the frozen earth thaws when they are put in place. Gelisols are found chiefly in Siberia, Alaska and Canada. Smaller areas are found in the Andes (mainly near the intersection between Chile, Bolivia and Argentina), Tibet, northern Scandinavia and the ice-free parts of Greenland and Antarctica. Fossil Gelisols are known from as far back as Precambrian ice ages 900 million years ago. Contents 1 Suborders 2 See also 3 Weblinks 4 References Suborders[edit] In USDA soil taxonomy, Gelisols are subdivided into: Histels: organic soils similar to histosols except that they have permafrost within two meters below ground surface. They have 80% or more organic materials from the soil surface to a depth of 50\u00a0cm or to a glacic layer or densic, lithic, or paralithic contact, whichever is shallowest. These soils occur predominantly in subarctic and low arctic regions of continuous or widespread permafrost. Less than one-third of the active layer (the soil between the ground surface and a permafrost table) or an ice layer which is at least 30-cm thick has been cryoturbated. Turbels: soils that show marked influence of cryoturbation (more than one-third of the depth of the active layer) such as irregular, broken, or distorted horizon boundaries and involutions and areas with patterned ground. They commonly contain tongues of mineral and organic horizons, organic and mineral intrusions and oriented rock fragments. Organic matter is accumulated on top of the permafrost and ice or sand wedges are a common features. Turbels occur primarily in the zone of continuous permafrost. Orthels: soils that show little or no cryoturbation (less than one-third of the depth of the active layer). Patterned ground (except for polygons) generally is lacking. Orthels occur primarily within the zone of discontinuous permafrost, and in alpine areas. See also[edit] Active layer Pedogenesis Pedology (soil study) Soil classification Weblinks[edit] profile photos (with classification) WRB homepage profile photos (with classification) IUSS World of Soils References[edit] Soil Survey Staff: Keys to Soil Taxonomy. 12th edition. Natural Resources Conservation Service. U.S. Department of Agriculture. Washington D.C., USA, 2014. \"Gelisols\". USDA-NRCS. Archived from the original on 2006-05-09. Retrieved 2006-05-14. \"Gelisols\". University of Florida. Archived from the original on September 18, 2004. Retrieved 2006-05-14. \"Gelisols\". University of Idaho. Retrieved 2006-05-14. \"Permafrost Soils and Biogeochemistry\" (PDF). University of Wisconsin. Archived from the original (pdf) on 2004-03-20. Retrieved 2006-05-14. ^ IUSS Working Group WRB (2015). \"World Reference Base for Soil Resources 2014, Update 2015\" (PDF). World Soil Resources Reports 106, FAO, Rome. vteSoil classificationUSDA soil taxonomy Alfisols Andisols Aridisols Entisols Gelisols Histosols Inceptisols Mollisols Oxisols Spodosols Ultisols Vertisols World Reference Base for Soil Resources (1998\u2013) Acrisols Alisols Andosols Anthrosols Arenosols Calcisols Cambisols Chernozem Cryosols Durisols Ferralsols Fluvisols Gleysols Gypsisols Histosol Kastanozems Leptosols Lixisols Luvisols Nitisols Phaeozems Planosols Plinthosols Podzols Regosols Retisols Solonchaks Solonetz Stagnosol Technosols Umbrisols Vertisols Other soil classification systems FAO soil classification (1974\u201398) Unified Soil Classification System AASHTO Soil Classification System R\u00e9f\u00e9rentiel p\u00e9dologique (French classification system) Canadian system of soil classification Australian Soil Classification Polish Soil Classification 1938 USDA soil taxonomy List of U.S. state soils List of vineyard soil types Non-systematic soil types Sand Silt Clay Loam Topsoil Subsoil Soil crust Claypan Hardpan Gypcrust Caliche Parent material Pedosphere Laimosphere Rhizosphere Bulk soil Alkali soil Bay mud Blue goo Brickearth Brown earth Calcareous grassland Dark earth Dry quicksand Eluvium Expansive clay Fill dirt Fuller's earth Hydrophobic soil Loess Lunar soil Martian soil Mud Muskeg Paleosol Peat Pedalfer Pedocal Podzol Prime farmland Serpentine soil Spodic soil Subaqueous soil Terra preta Terra rossa (soil) Tropical peat Yedoma Types of soil Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gelisol&oldid=885997990\" Categories: PedologyTypes of soilArctic geography terminologyPermafrost Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces ArticleTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version Languages Az\u0259rbaycanca\u0411\u0435\u043b\u0430\u0440\u0443\u0441\u043a\u0430\u044fCatal\u00e0DeutschItalianoMagyarPolski\u0420\u0443\u0441\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439\u4e2d\u6587 Edit links This page was last edited on 3 March 2019, at 18:04\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "Cryosol | FAO soil group | Britannica.com ENCYCLOP\u00c6DIA BRITANNICA START YOUR FREE TRIAL Log In \u00b7 Join Demystified Quizzes Galleries Lists On This Day Biographies Newsletters START YOUR FREE TRIAL Search Britannica What are you looking for? Search Click here to search Browse popular topics: Crystal Palace Victoria Monroe Doctrine Kepler's laws of planetary motion Open Door policy Bring fact-checked results to the top of your browser search. Learn More. CryosolFAO soil group Written By: The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica See Article History Cryosol, one of the 30 soil groups in the classification system of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). Cryosols are characterized by frozen soil within 1 metre (39 inches) of the land surface and by waterlogging during periods of thaw. They often show disrupted soil layers, cracks, or patterned surface features such as frost mounds, caused by the physical actions of ice formation and melting. Cryosols may be either mineral soils or humus-rich materials. Occupying about 17.7 million square km (6.83 million square miles) in the Arctic regions and in Antarctica, Cryosols are found principally in the wilds of Alaska, Canada, China, and Russia in the Northern Hemisphere. They are associated frequently with Gleysols, Histosols, and Podzols. Learn More in these related Britannica articles: tundra: Soils as Gelisols or Cryosols, depending on the soil classification system used. Both are easily eroded soil types characterized by the presence of permafrost and showing an active surface layer shaped by the alternating freezing and thawing that comes with seasonal variations in temperature. In the higher latitudes of\u2026 soil: FAO soil groups The classification system of the FAO primarily involves a two-level nomenclature comprising the name of a soil group and a modifying adjective that serves to identify a soil unit within a group on the FAO Soil Map of the World. It is not meant to substitute for\u2026 humus Humus, nonliving, finely divided organic matter in soil, derived from microbial decomposition of plant and animal substances. Humus, which ranges in colour from brown to black, consists of about 60 percent carbon, 6 percent nitrogen, and smaller amounts of phosphorus and sulfur. As humus decomposes, its components are changed into\u2026 Gleysol Gleysol, one of the 30 soil groups in the classification system of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). Gleysols are formed under waterlogged conditions produced by rising groundwater. In the tropics and subtropics they are cultivated for rice or, after drainage, for field crops and trees. Gleysols found in the\u2026 Histosol Histosol, one of the 30 soil groups in the classification system of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). Histosols are low-density, acidic soils with a high proportion of organic material. Formed mainly in cold climates and under waterlogged conditions, they are the most common soil in northern Finland, in western\u2026 ADDITIONAL MEDIAMore About Cryosol1 reference found in Britannica articlesAssorted Referencestundra In tundra: Soils Article History Article Contributors Feedback Corrections? Updates? Help us improve this article! Contact our editors with your feedback. Cryosol Quick Facts View Media Page related topicsSoil Edit Mode Cryosol FAO soil group Tips for Editing Leave Edit Mode Submit Tips For Editing We welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. You can make it easier for us to review and, hopefully, publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind. Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience. You may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered. Any text you add should be original, not copied from other sources. At the bottom of the article, feel free to list any sources that support your changes, so that we can fully understand their context. (Internet URLs are the best.) Your contribution may be further edited by our staff, and its publication is subject to our final approval. Unfortunately, our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions. Submit Thank You for Your Contribution! Our editors will review what you've submitted, and if it meets our criteria, we'll add it to the article. Please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors, and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed. Uh Oh There was a problem with your submission. Please try again later. Close Keep Exploring Britannica Plate tectonics Plate tectonics, theory dealing with the dynamics of Earth\u2019s outer shell\u2014the lithosphere\u2014that revolutionized\u2026 Read this Article Aurora Aurora, luminous phenomenon of Earth\u2019s upper atmosphere that occurs primarily in high latitudes of both\u2026 Read this Article World Heritage site World Heritage site, any of various areas or objects inscribed on the United Nations Educational, Scientific\u2026 Read this Article View More Stay Connected Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Pinterest Newsletters About Us About Our Ads Partner Program Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use \u00a92019 Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica, Inc. Menu Home Demystified Quizzes Galleries Lists On This Day Biographies Newsletters Login Join Cryosol FAO soil group Article Media Print Cite Share SHARE Facebook Twitter Feedback Feedback Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login). Select feedback type: Select a type (Required) Factual Correction Spelling/Grammar Correction Link Correction Additional Information Other Submit Feedback If you prefer to suggest your own revision of the article, you can go to edit mode (requires login). Thank you for your feedback Our editors will review what you\u2019ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. Join Britannica's Publishing Partner Program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work! Share SHARE Facebook Twitter Search \u00d7 close Britannica Celebrates 100 Women Trailblazers", "Cryosol - International Permafrost Association Arctic Portal AP Community Portlets Arctic Council Science Organizations Maps Library Acronyms Links Search International Permafrost Association Fostering permafrost research to the ends of the Earth Search ... Member login Contact \ufeff Menu HomeAbout Us Antarctic Permafrost and Periglacial EnvironmentsCoastal and Offshore Permafrost Dynamics (COPD)CryosolGlaciers and Permafrost Hazards in High Mountain Slopes (GAPHAZ)Isotopes and Geochemistry of PermafrostPeriglacial Landforms, Processes and ClimatePermafrost and Climate Modeling and Mapping Subgroup Planetary Permafrost and AstrobiologyPermafrost Engineering Subgroup on Engineering Geology for Development in Permafrost Regions Task Force on Remote SensingTask Force on Subglacial PermafrostStanding Committee on Data, Information and CommunicationsStanding Committee on Education and OutreachInternational Advisory Committee for ICOPCarbon Pools in Permafrost Regions (CAPP)Arctic Circumpolar Coastal Observatory Network (ACCONET)Arctic Coastal Dynamics (ACD)International Polar Year (2007-2009) OfficersCountry MembersConstitutionResolutionsExternal RelationsStanding Committees ANTPASEducation & Outreach HistoryBecome a Member Activities Action GroupsInterest Groups Permafrost and Carbon Budgets Core Projects PRP IPA Awards Pewe AwardMelnikov AwardLifetime Award Outreach Outreach ActivitiesPYRN Meetings International ConferencesRegional Conferences Publications IPA Newsletter - Frozen GroundIPA Country ReportsPPP ReportsConference ProceedingsReports and MinutesHandbookGlossaryOccasional Publications What is Permafrost?International Report \"State of the Arctic Coast 2010\" Products Permafrost Data IPA Permafrost MapGTN-P Workshop 2015GTN-P Workshop 2013GTN-P Workshop 2011TSPCALM Mailing ListCourses (IUCP)Media PrintGalleriesPodcasts Member Area Home About Us Working parties Cryosol Cryosol 2. Cryosol Co-chairs Galina Mazhitova, Russia galina_mazhitova@mail.ru Eva-Maria Pfeiffer, Germany empfeiffer@ifb.uni-hamburg.de Statement of Goals: Link the knowledge about cryosols in both hemispheres including Arctic, Antarctic and mountain regions Evaluate what will happen with regional C-pools under ongoing climate and environmental changes Contribute knowledge about Cryosol related processes for climate, hydrology, and ecological modelling Teach young permafrost students/scientists about the diversity and importance of cryosols as a basic knowledge for the protection of cold ecosystems Activities Organizing a bipolar CWG workshop \u201cClimate Change and Cryosols\u201d Publish a review (trend) paper on Cryosols of both hemispheres under a changing climate V International Conference on Cryopedology (2009, Ulan-Ude, Russia), IUSS Congress (2010, Brisbane, Australia), field trip to Antarctica on Correlation of Antarctic and Arctic soil processes (2010 or 2011) Web page: http://www.geowiss.uni-hamburg.de/i-boden/CWG-IPA-IUSS/index.htmlLiaison person with SCDIC: Eva-Maria PfeifferLiaison international organisations and programmes: IUSS, CAPP, GCP, ANTPAS, CALM Officers Country Members Constitution Resolutions External Relations Standing Committees ANTPAS Education & Outreach History Become a Member Contact: contact@ipa-permafrost.orgThe International Permafrost Association website is designed and hosted by the Arctic PortalCopyright \u00a9 2008-2015 International Permafrost Association All Rights Reserved IPA on Facebook IPA on Twitter IPA on Youtube IPA RSS", "Cryosol | Soil Monoliths Soil Monoliths Search Primary Menu Skip to content Home Site Content Brunisol Chernozem Gleysol Luvisol Solonetz Podzol Organic Regosol Cryosol Vertisol About About History Team Contact Tutorial How to Read a Soil Monolith Practice Questions Parent Material Index Resources Search for: Cryosol Soil mixing due to freeze/thaw is visible in this Cryosolic profile. Cryosols (or Gelisols in USDA Soil Taxonomy) have permafrost either within 1 m of the surface or within 2 m if the pedon is strongly cryoturbated in the active layer.\u00a0 They form in regions that have a mean annual soil temperature below 0\u00b0C. Cryosols occupy much of the northern third of Canada. The great groups of the Cryosolic order are defined by two main criteria (1) the presence or absence of obvious cryoturbation, and (2) the nature of the parent material (mineral or organic). Organic Cryosol Great Group These soils have formed in organic parent material (i.e., material with >17% organic C by weight). They are similar to soils of the Organic order in terms of the diagnostic thickness of the organic layers, but they also have permafrost within 1 m of the surface. Generally, there is no evidence of cryoturbation in soils of this great group. Turbic Cryosol Great Group The soils of Turbic great group are characterized by the marked evidence of cryoturbation. Within the soil pit, this will appear as irregular or broken horizons and evidence of mixing of the horizons. At the soil surface, this may also appear as patterned ground. Given the instability associated with actively turbic sites, surface vegetation may be minimal or completely absent, with parent material evident right at the soil surface. Static Cryosol Great Group Static Cryosols are mineral soils without evidence of cryoturbation. They are distinguished from similar soils of other orders (such as Brunisols) by the presence of permafrost within 1 m of the surface. They commonly occur in association with the other two great groups but tend to be found in portions of the landscape with very coarse or recently deposited parent material and/or low moisture levels inhibit the development of turbic features. Leave a Reply Cancel replyYou must be logged in to post a comment. Soil Orders Brunisol Sombric (3) 1-01 Orthic Sombric Brunisol 1-02 Eluviated Sombric Brunisol 1-03 Gleyed Sombric Brunisol Melanic (5) 1-04 Orthic Melanic Brunisol 1-05 Orthic Melanic Brunisol 1-06 Orthic Melanic Brunisol 1-07 Orthic Melanic Brunisol 1-08 Gleyed Melanic Brunisol Eutric (11) 1-09 Orthic Eutric Brunisol 1-10 Orthic Eutric Brunisol 1-11 Orthic Eutric Brunisol 1-13 Orthic Eutric Brunisol 1-14 Orthic Eutric Brunisol 1-15 Orthic Eutric Brunisol 1-16 Eluviated Eutric Brunisol 1-17 Eluviated Eutric Brunisol 1-18 Eluviated Eutric Brunisol 1-19 Eluviated Eutric Brunisol 1-21 Degraded Eutric Brunisol Dystric (1) 1-20 Orthic Dystric Brunisol Chernozem Black (7) 2-01 Orthic Black Chernozem 2-02 Orthic Black Chernozem 2-03 Orthic Black Chernozem 2-05 Orthic Black Chernozem 2-06 Orthic Black Chernozem 2-07 Orthic Black Chernozem 2-08 Orthic Black Chernozem Dark Gray (5) 2-09 Orthic Dark Gray Chernozem 2-10 Orthic Dark Gray Chernozem 2-11 Orthic Dark Gray Chernozem 2-12 Rego Dark Gray Chernozem 2-16 Orthic Dark Gray Chernozem Brown (1) 2-13 Eluviated Brown Chernozem Dark Brown (1) 2-14 Orthic Dark Brown Chernozem Gleysol Luvic Gleysolic (3) 4-01 Humic Luvic Gleysol 4-04 Humic Luvic Gleysol 4-05 Humic Luvic Gleysol Humic Gleysolic (4) 4-02 Orthic Humic Gleysol 4-03 Orthic Humic Gleysol 4-06 Orthic Humic Gleysol 4-07 Fera Humic Gleysol Gleysolic (0) Luvisol Gray (48) 5-01 Podzolic Gray Luvisol 5-02 Podzolic Gray Luvisol 5-03 Podzolic Gray Luvisol 5-05 Podzolic Gray Luvisol 5-06 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-07 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-08 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-09 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-10 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-11 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-12 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-13 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-14 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-15 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-16 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-17 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-18 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-19 Podzolic Gray Luvisol 5-20 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-21 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-22 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-23 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-26 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-28 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-29 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-30 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-31 Orthic Dark Gray Luvisol 5-32 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-33 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-34 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-35 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-36 Orthic Gray Luvisol 5-37 Gleyed Gray Luvisol 5-38 Gleyed Gray Luvisol 5-39 Gleyed Gray Luvisol 5-40 Gleyed Gray Luvisol 5-41 Podzolic Gray Luvisol 5-42 Gleyed Gray Luvisol 5-43 Gleyed Gray Luvisol 5-44 Gleyed Gray Luvisol 5-45 Dark Gray Luvisol 5-46 Dark Gray Luvisol 5-47 Dark Gray Luvisol 5-48 Dark Gray Luvisol 5-49 Dark Gray Luvisol 5-50 Dark Gray Luvisol 5-51 Dark Gray Luvisol 5-52 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-53 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-54 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-55 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-56 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-57 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-58 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-59 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-60 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-61 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol 5-62 Brunisolic Gray Luvisol Gray Brown Luvisol (0) Solonetz Solonetz (2) 9-20 Dark Brown 9-21 Black Solonetz Solodized (1) 9-22 Orthic Black Solodized Solod (18) 9-01 Dark Gray Solod 9-02 Dark Gray Solod 9-03 Dark Gray Solod 9-05 Gray Solod 9-06 Gray Solod 9-07 Gray Solod 9-08 Gray Solod 9-09 Gray Solod 9-10 Gray Solod 9-11 Gray Solod 9-12 Gray Solod 9-13 Dark Brown Solod 9-14 Brown Solod 9-15 Brown Solod 9-16 Brown Solod 9-17 Brown Solod 9-18 Brown Solod 9-19 Black Solod Vertic Solonetz (0) Podzol Humo-Ferric (50) 7-01 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-02 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-03 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-04 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-05 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-06 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-07 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-08 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-09 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-10 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-11 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-12 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-13 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-14 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-15 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-16 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-17 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-18 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-19 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-20 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-21 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-22 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-23 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-24 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-25 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-26 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-27 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-28 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-30 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-31 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-32 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-33 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-34 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-35 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-36 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-37 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-38 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-39 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-40 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-41 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-42 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-43 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-44 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-45 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-46 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-47 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-48 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-49 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-50 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-51 Orthic Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-52 Gleyed Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-53 Gleyed Humo-Ferric Podzol 7-55 Orstein Humo-Ferric Podzol Humic (2) 7-56 Orthic Humic Podzol 7-57 Orthic Humic Podzol Ferro-Humic (1) 7-54 Gleyed Humo-Ferric Podzol Organic Fibrisol (0) Mesisol (0) Humisol (1) 6-01 Terric Humisol Folisol (0) Regosol Humic (0) Regosol (5) 8-01 Orthic Regosol 8-02 Orthic Regosol 8-03 Cumulic Regosol 8-04 Cumulic Regosol 8-05 Cumulic Regosol Cryosol Organic (0) Turbic (0) Static (0) Vertisol Humic (0) Vertisol (0) Parent Material Index Proudly powered by WordPress", "How to Pronounce Cryosol - YouTube Skip navigation Sign in Search Loading... Close This video is unavailable. Watch QueueQueueWatch QueueQueue Remove allDisconnect The next video is startingstop Loading... Watch Queue Queue __count__/__total__ YouTube TV - No long term contract Loading... Unlimited DVR storage space. Live TV from 60+ channels. No cable box required. Cancel anytime. Working... No thanks Try it free Find out whyClose How to Pronounce Cryosol Pronunciation Guide Loading... Unsubscribe from Pronunciation Guide? Cancel Unsubscribe Working... SubscribeSubscribedUnsubscribe54K Loading... Loading... Working... Add to Want to watch this again later? Sign in to add this video to a playlist. Sign in Share More Report Need to report the video? Sign in to report inappropriate content. Sign in Add translations 40 views 0 Like this video? Sign in to make your opinion count. Sign in 1 0 Don't like this video? Sign in to make your opinion count. Sign in 1 Loading... Loading... Rating is available when the video has been rented. This feature is not available right now. Please try again later. Published on Mar 2, 2015This video shows you how to pronounce Cryosol Category People & Blogs Show more Show less Loading... Autoplay When autoplay is enabled, a suggested video will automatically play next. Up next In just 2 Minutes - Turn Yellow Teeth to Pearl White With This Kitchen Ingredients amazing Teeth - Duration: 4:54. everyday culture 2,598,527 views 4:54 POWERFUL FULL AFTERBURN Departure 3x Su-22 Fitters Polish AF; Volkel 2013 - Duration: 8:41. MrSoeberg 1,827,410 views 8:41 Mother cow clearly asks man to rescue her newborn calf - Duration: 3:40. Rumble Viral 9,970,587 views 3:40 Crash of Giant RC B 25 model from Ziroli plan - Maiden Flight disaster - Duration: 11:06. ScaleJetFred 2,806,187 views 11:06 Things You're Consuming Wrong - Duration: 7:29. BE AMAZED 6,201,417 views 7:29 Cat meeting the puppies for the first time. - Duration: 8:32. Stefan Atkinson 12,275,297 views 8:32 Aidan Michael Stillborn 33 weeks May 15 2013 - Duration: 7:51. Bailey Strong 619,809 views 7:51 10 roads you would never want to drive on! - Duration: 4:48. Did You Know ? 4,573,817 views 4:48 What I Eat In A Day As A Model | Fashion Week Preparation | Sanne Vloet - Duration: 11:17. Sanne Vloet 1,589,356 views 11:17 When She Saw This Picture In An Antique Store Window, This Woman Suddenly Started Screaming - Duration: 5:13. Let Me Know 609,816 views 5:13 Greatest Trick Plays in Baseball History - Duration: 6:56. Savage Brick Sports 12,082,545 views 6:56 A Simple Test Will Show If You Are a Genuine Introvert - Duration: 13:21. BRIGHT SIDE 5,755,011 views 13:21 My Permanent Makeup 10 Years Later: Permanent Concealer, Eyeliner, Nose & Eyebrow Tattoos - Duration: 12:08. GlitterForever17 2,011,016 views 12:08 What's the Deepest Hole We Can Possibly Dig? - Duration: 8:11. RealLifeLore 30,535,775 views 8:11 Famous Mansions No One Wants To Buy For Any Price - Duration: 11:18. BE AMAZED 5,230,134 views 11:18 Lion Sees His Adoptive Dad After 7 Years - Truly Heart-warming - Duration: 3:30. TopRealm 17,444,069 views 3:30 Turn dirty yellow teeth to Snow White in just 3 minutes - Duration: 2:36. OMG Remedies 2,314,012 views 2:36 25 HACKS YOU'D WISH YOU'D KNOWN SOONER - Duration: 26:25. 5-Minute Crafts 5,778,441 views 26:25 Rehabilitating Dehydrated Orchids: Semi-Hydroponics - Duration: 6:59. Michael's Orchids 708,686 views 6:59 12 ILLUSIONS TO TEST YOUR BRAIN - Duration: 6:47. The CoolStuff 12,123,696 views 6:47 Loading more suggestions... Show more Language: English Location: United States Restricted Mode: Off History Help Loading... Loading... Loading... About Press Copyright Creators Advertise Developers Terms Privacy Policy & Safety Send feedback Test new features Loading... Working... Sign in to add this to Watch Later Add to Loading playlists...", "Frozen Ground \u2013 Defined TermNo results found.Add DefinitionNEWLoginFrozen Ground2 definitionsFrozen Groundas defined in Glossary of Meteorological Termsby American Meteorological SocietySoil within which the moisture has predominantly changed to ice, the unfrozen portion being in vapor phase. Ice within the soil bonds (adfreezes) adjacent soil particles and renders frozen ground very hard. \"Permanently\" frozen ground is called permafrost. \"Dry\" frozen ground is relatively loose and crumbly because of the lack of bonding ice. Frozen ground is sometimes inadvisedly called frost or ground frost. 29 1 ShareFrozen Groundas defined in IPCC, 2012 - Annex II - Glossaryby Intergovernmental Panel on Climate ChangeSoil or rock in which part or all of the pore water is frozen. Perennially frozen ground is called permafrost. Ground that freezes and thaws annually is called seasonally frozen ground. 24 0 ShareLoading conversations.About this termFrozen Ground has been defined 2 different ways in documents like Glossary of Meteorological Terms, IPCC, 2012 - Annex II - Glossary.Similar or Related TermsA dictionary of legal, industry-specific, and uncommon terms.Copyright \u00a9 Defined Term.About UsAboutFAQLegalContactConnectFacebook Twitter Instagram", "MetEd \u00bb Resources \u00bb Glossaries This site is designed to work with Javascript enabled. Please use your browser's help menu to find out how to enable Javascript. Sign Up Have an account? Sign In Donate Home Education & Training Communities Resources About My MetEd Resources \u00bb Glossaries Glossaries COMET\u00a0\u00a0|\u00a0\u00a0English\u00a0\u00a0|\u00a0\u00a0Spanish\u00a0\u00a0|\u00a0\u00a0Multilingual\u00a0\u00a0|\u00a0\u00a0Acronyms COMET COMET Glossary of Meteorology and Hydrology Terms (bilingual, English / Spanish glossary of about 9200 meteorology, hydrology and allied sciences terms used in the Spanish versions of COMET's lessons. Click the link to download a .zip archive containing a docx file. The glossary will be updated twice a year, current version: 7a, 06/2012) English Australia Bureau of Meteorology Glossary AMS Glossary of Meteorology Comprehensive Glossary of Weather Terms for Storm Spotters Glossary of NHC/TPC Terms NOAA Tide and Current Glossary NWS Glossary Satellite Meteorology Glossary and List of Acronyms (University of Wisconsin, Madison) Spanish Diccionario de la lengua espa\u00f1ola (Real Academia Espa\u00f1ola website, includes access to the Diccionario panhisp\u00e1nico de dudas) Vademecum REMER Glossaries Index to a variety of glossaries in Spanish, including topics such as Disaster Management, Meteorology, Aeronautics, Aviation, Geology, Disaster Prevention and Warning, Cartography and Topography, Hydrology, Flood-Related Terms, Metrology, Drought, Forest Fires and Fire Safety Terms, and many others. Glossary of the National Meteorological Service of Uruguay Diccionario de T\u00e9rminos Meteorol\u00f3gicos para Observadores de Tormentas (Storm-Spotters) Spanish translation of NOAA Technical Memorandum NWS SR-145: A Comprehensive Glossary of Weather Terms for Storm Spotters. Multilingual METEOTERM, WMO multilingual glossary (type guest in both fields for access) TERMIUM Plus, the Government of Canada's terminology and linguistic data bank (English, French & Spanish) Spain Severe Weather's Bilingual Dictionary of Terms (English/Spanish) International Hydrographic Dictionary (DHYDRO's English/Spanish Dictionary) Glossary of Permafrost and Related Ground Ice Terms (Frozen Ground Data Center; English definitions with numbered entries identifying equivalent terms in Spanish and other languages) UNESCO International Glossary of Hydrology (English index, multilingual glossary) Meteorology Glossary of the Universitat Polit\u00e8cnica de Catalunya (Catalan, Spanish, French and English) UN Termbase (5 languages, includes meteorology) Acronyms NCAR/UCAR acronym list (English) NOAA/NWS acronym list (English) WMO List of Acronyms (English) Contact Us Got a link to a resource that you want to share? Our contact information is available here. Go Site Map General Home Search Register Education and Training Lesson/Resource Listing Course Listing Residence and Virtual Courses New Publications RSS Mailing List Communities Educator's Portal SOOs Outreach Program Int'l Warning Systems CALMet Broadcast Meteorology Facebook Group YouTube Channel Resources Registration and Support FAQs Technical Notes The COMET Virtual Classroom Meteorology Glossaries Operational Model Encyclopedia Translation Resource Center Case Study Template About Us What Is MetEd? What's New? Contact Us Legal Information Who We Are MetEd is operated by The COMET\u00ae Program, a talented team of scientists, instructional designers, and developers. We've been producing quality educational materials since 1989. COMET and MetEd are proud to be a part of UCAR Community Programs. \u00a9 Copyright 2019, The University Corporation for Atmospheric Research. All Rights Reserved. Legal Notices", "Permafrost - Alaska Nature and Science (U.S. National Park Service) Skip to global NPS navigation Skip to main content Skip to footer National Park Service Logo National Park Service Search This Site All NPS Search Open Menu Explore This Park Alaska Nature and Science \u00d7 Contact Us Permafrost Exposed yedoma permafrost exposed along an eroded Arctic coast. NPS Permafrost is permanently frozen ground that underlies much of the landscape in the Arctic. It affects nearly everything in the Arctic ecosystem, including soils, vegetation, water, and wildlife. During summer months, the top layer of soil thaws creating a wet landscape with rapid runoff. The striking quilt-like pattern of permafrost landscapes is caused by the build-up and thawing of ice in the ground, which produces pits, ponds, and landslides. Annual permafrost thaw is normal, but thawing is expected to increase with climate change. The National Park Service is monitoring permafrost and the land dynamics associated with permafrost thaw to better understand the changes and the effects on the landscape. Permafrost Terminology Permafrost ground that remains frozen longer than two consecutive years; ground that doesn't thaw in the summer Yedoma an organic-rich Pleistocene-age permafrost with high ice content Active Layer in areas with permafrost, the top portion of the soil that thaws and refreezes each year Ice Wedge polygon-like pattern on the landscape associated with permafrost caused by repeated cycles of melting, freezing, and cracking Thermokarst landscape formations associated with permafrost thaw Pingo an earth-covered mound of ice, which creates topography and provides habitat for arctic foxes Slump a term that refers to the sagging or degradation of the landscape caused by permafrost thaw Hydrology the study of the location, movement, and quality of water on earth; heavily influenced by permafrost in Arctic systems Erosion the transport of soil and rock from the earth's surface by wind or water; a significant effect of permafrost thaw Learn more about permafrost Sort By: Relevance Recently Updated Title Show 10 40 per page Loading results... Tags: permafrost permafrost permafrost thaw Last updated: July 27, 2017 Tools Site Index Contact Us Stay Connected Facebook Twitter Instagram Flickr Search This Site All NPS National Park Service U.S. Department of the Interior National Park Service Logo National Park Service Logo Accessibility Privacy Policy FOIA Notices Disclaimer FAQ No Fear Act Contact Us USA.gov Facebook Facebook Facebook Youtube Youtube Youtube Twitter Twitter Twitter Instagram Instagram Instagram Flickr Flickr Flickr iTunes iTunes iTunes", "YouTube Skip navigation Sign in Search Loading... Close This video is no longer available because the YouTube account associated with this video has been terminated. Sorry about that. Watch QueueQueueWatch QueueQueue Remove allDisconnect The next video is startingstop Loading... Watch Queue Queue __count__/__total__ Language: English Location: United States Restricted Mode: Off History Help Loading... Loading... Loading... About Press Copyright Creators Advertise Developers Terms Privacy Policy & Safety Send feedback Test new features Loading... Working... Sign in to add this to Watch Later Add to Loading playlists...", "Permafrost \u2013 Defined TermNo results found.Add DefinitionNEWLoginPermafrost12 definitionsPermafrostas defined in Meteorology Terminologyby National Oceanic and Atmospheric AdministrationA soil layer below the surface of tundra regions that remains frozen permanently. 70 0 SharePermafrostas defined in Glossary of Wildland Fire Terminologyby National Wildfire Coordinating GroupA short term for \"permanently frozen ground\"; any part of the earth's crust, bedrock, or soil mantle that remains below 32\u00b0 F (0\u00b0 C) continuously for a number of years. 59 0 SharePermafrostas defined in Reclamation Glossaryby U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of ReclamationPerennially frozen soil. 52 0 SharePermafrostas defined in 2015 NAL Glossaryby United States Department of Agriculture, National Agricultural Library\"permafrost\": Permanently frozen ground; generally refers to a layer at some depth below the soil surface. Any layer above it, which thaws in summer, is termed the active layer. 44 0 SharePermafrostas defined in Glossary of Soil Termsby European Commission(i) permanently frozen subsurface material underlying the solum; (ii) perennially frozen soil horizon where temperature remains below 0\u00b0C throughout the year and in which Cryosols form. 52 0 SharePermafrostas defined in Glossaryby National Aeronautics and Space AdministrationNational Aeronautics Space Administration, Earth ObservatoryPerennially frozen ground that occurs wherever the temperature remains below 0\u00b0 C for several years. 64 0 SharePermafrostas defined in Global Change Glossaryby U.S. Global Change Research ProgramGround that remains at or below freezing for at least two consecutive years. 34 0 SharePermafrostas defined in Glossaryby National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Climate Program OfficePerennially frozen ground that occurs wherever the temperature remains below 0\u00ef\u00bf\u00bdC for several years. 48 0 SharePermafrostas defined in Glossaryby U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation ServiceGround, soil, or rock that remains at or below 0 \u00b0C for at least two years. \u00a0It is defined on the basis of temperature and is not necessarily frozen (i.e., cemented by ice). 65 0 SharePermafrostas defined in Glossary of Meteorological Termsby American Meteorological SocietyA layer of soil or bedrock at a variable depth beneath the surface of the earth in which the\u00a0temperature\u00a0has been below\u00a0freezing\u00a0continuously from a few to several thousands of years.Permafrost exists where the summer heating fails to descend to the base of the layer of\u00a0frozen ground. A continuous stratum of permafrost is found where the annual\u00a0mean temperature\u00a0is below about -5\u00b0C (23\u00b0F).\u00a0active layer.As limited in application by P. F. Svetsov, soil that is known to have been frozen for at least a century. 59 0 Share12Loading conversations.About this termPermafrost has been defined 12 different ways in documents like Meteorology Terminology, Glossary of Wildland Fire Terminology, Reclamation Glossary, and 7 more.Similar or Related TermsA dictionary of legal, industry-specific, and uncommon terms.Copyright \u00a9 Defined Term.About UsAboutFAQLegalContactConnectFacebook Twitter Instagram", "frozen ground or permafrost | National Snow and Ice Data Center Skip to main content National Snow and Ice Data Center Home Data Data Sets for Research Brightness Temperature Glaciers Ice Sheets Permafrost Sea Ice Soil Moisture Snow ...search for more Scientific Data Search Support for Researchers Analysis & Imaging Tools Data Announcements Submit Your Data Data Policies User Support Data for Everyone Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Glacier Photograph Collection Greenland Ice Sheet Today MASIE (Daily sea ice extent) Satellite Observations of Arctic Change Sea Ice Index Virtual Globes: Google Earth Sponsored Programs Antarctic Glaciological Data Center Exchange for Local Observations and Knowledge of the Arctic (ELOKA) NOAA at NSIDC NASA Distributed Active Archive Center at NSIDC (NSIDC DAAC) Looking for facts and information? See About the Cryosphere. Research Scientists Research Grants Scientific Publications Informatics Research NSIDC Scientific Expeditions On Thin Ice: Expedition to a Crumbling Ice Shelf Scientists blog from Antarctica and provide a glimpse of what it's like to do research in the field. Read their blog ... News For the Media Newsroom: For the Media For Data Users Data Announcements The Drift Current Conditions Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Greenland Today Satellite Observations of Arctic Change NSIDC In the News Events NSIDC Monthly Highlights Icelights: Answers to your burning questions about ice and climate What's hot in the news around climate and sea ice and what are scientists talking about now? Read more... About About NSIDC NSIDC People Our Sponsors Jobs NSIDC Monthly Highlights Use & Copyright Contact Us Support NSIDC NSIDC's Green Data Center About the Cryosphere Quick Facts All About The Cryosphere All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Frozen Ground All About Sea Ice All About Arctic Climatology & Meteorology Snow, Ice and Climate Change Studying the Cryosphere Photo Gallery Educational Resources Cryosphere Glossary What is the Cryosphere? When scientists talk about the cryosphere, they mean the places on Earth where water is in its solid form, frozen into ice or snow. Read more ... Web pagesData Sets Cryosphere Glossary - Choose a Topic - climatology and meteorology freshwater ice frozen ground or permafrost glaciers icebergs and ice shelves ice sheets sea ice snow frozen ground or permafrost 5 February 2018Scientists find massive reserves of mercury hidden in permafrostThe finding has significant implications for human health and ecosystems worldwide. thaw basina depression of the permafrost table created by naturally induced thawing. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost suscitic cryogenic fabrica distinct soil micromorphology, resulting from the effects of freezing and thawing processes, in which coarser soil particles have vertical or near-vertical orientation. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost surface thawing indexthe cumulative number of degree-days above 0\u00b0C for the surface temperature (of the ground, pavement, etc.) during a given period. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost yedomaA type of Pleistocene-age (formed 1.8 million to 10,000 years before present) permafrost that contains a significant amount of organic material with ice content of 50\u0096 to 90 percent by volume. Thawing yedoma is a significant source of atmospheric methane. A yedoma in Russia shows the thick layer of ice and carbon material exposed along this body of water. --Credit: Vladimir Romanovsky Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost zone of gas-hydrate stabilitythat portion of the subsurface where the conditions of temperature and pressure are suitable for the formation and preservation of gas hydrates.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost zero curtainthe persistence of a nearly constant temperature, very close to the freezing point, during annual freezing (and occasionally during thawing) of the active layer.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost Young's Modulusthe ratio of increase in stress acting on a test specimen, to the resulting increase in strain, under constant transverse stress.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost well-bonded permafrostice-bearing permafrost in which all the soil particles are held together by ice.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost wedge iceice occurring in an ice wedge.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost Pages1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 \u2026 next \u203a last \u00bb Find Data Search NSIDC Data NASA Earthdata Search IceBridge Portal Data Collections List Stay Current Arctic Sea Ice News and Analysis Sea Ice Index (Passive microwave satellite data) MASIE (Daily sea ice extent, multi-source) Greenland Today Newsroom Learn About Snow and Ice Icelights: Answers to Your Questions Cryosphere Quick Facts All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Sea Ice Arctic Climatology - A Primer Get Help Knowledge Base Etc. Use & Copyright Web Policy Jobs Home | Contact Us\u00a9 2019, National Snow and Ice Data Center :: Advancing knowledge of Earth's frozen regions", "United States Permafrost Association MEMBERSHIP CORPORATE MEMBERS INSTITUTIONAL MEMBERS MEETINGS CONTRIBUTE REPORTS KIDS LINKS HOME President Dmitry Streletskiy President Elect John Zarling Past President Thomas Douglas Secretary Susan Wilson Treasurer Gerald Frost Board Members Cathy Wilson John Thornley IPA Representative Fritz Nelson Thomas Krzewinski PYRN Representative: Matthew Whitley US Permafrost Association PO Box 750141 Fairbanks, AK 99775-0141 Ph: 302-831-0852 Fax 302-831-6654 Frozen Ground 2018 Permafrost Glossary Most of the definitions given below were taken from the Multi-Language Glossary of Permafrost and Related Ground-Ice Terms (van Everdingen, 1998). This source should be consulted for more extensive definitions. Updates, modifications, or new definitions are indicated by inclusion of additional references. Active Layer The layer of ground subject to annual thawing and freezing in areas underlain by permafrost Active-layer Detachment Slide Shallow landslides that develop in permafrost areas, involving reduction in effective stress and strength at the contact between a thawing overburden and underlying frozen material. Active-layer detachment slides can occur in response to high seasonal air temperature, summer rainfall events, rapid melting of snowcover, or surface disturbances See Lewkowicz (1992). Active-layer Thickness The thickness of the layer of ground subject to annual thawing and freezing in areas underlain by permafrost (cf. thaw depth) See Nelson and Hinkel (2003). Alas A large depression of the ground surface produced by thawing of a large area (e.g., > 1 ha) of very thick and exceedingly ice-rich permafrost. Cryoturbation A collective term used to describe all soil movements due to frost action. Irregular structures formed in earth materials by frost penetration and frost action processes, and characterized by folded, broken, and dislocated beds and lenses of unconsolidated deposits, included organic horizons, or bedrock. Degree-day A derived unit of measurement used to express the departure of the mean temperature for a day from a given reference temperature. Also see freezing index and thawing index. Depth Of Zero Annual Amplitude The distance from the ground surface downward to the level beneath which there is practically no annual fluctuation in ground temperature. Excess Ice The volume of ice in the ground that exceeds the total pore volume that the ground would have under natural unfrozen conditions. Freeze-thaw Cycle Freezing of material, followed by thawing. The two fundamental frequencies involved are diurnal and annual. Freezing Index The cumulative number of degree-days below 0oC for a given time period (usually seasonal). Frost Action The process of alternate freezing and thawing of moisture in soil, rock, and other materials, and the resulting effects on materials and on structures placed on or in the ground. Frost Creep The net downslope displacement that occurs when a soil, during a freeze-thaw cycle, expands perpendicular to the ground surface and settles in a nearly vertical direction. Frost Heave The upward or outward movement of the ground surface (or objects on or in the ground) caused by the formation of ice in the soil. Frost Mound Any mound-shaped landform produced by ground freezing, combined with accumulation of ground ice due to groundwater movement or migration of soil moisture. Also see Nelson et al. (1992). Frost Penetration The movement of a freezing front into the ground during freezing. Frost Susceptible Soil Subsurface earth materials in which segregated ice will form (causing frost heave) under the required conditions of moisture supply and temperature. Frozen Ground Soil or rock in which part or all of the pore water has turned into ice. Gas Hydrate A special form of solid clathrate compound in which crystal lattice cages or chambers, consisting of host molecules, enclose guest molecules. Gelifluction The slow downslope flow of unfrozen earth materials over a frozen substrate. Also see solifluction. Geocryology The study of earth materials and processes involving temperatures of 0oC or below. Geothermal Gradient The rate of temperature increase with depth below the ground surface. Ground Ice A general term referring to all types of ice contained in freezing and frozen ground. High-center Polygon An ice-wedge polygon in which melting of the surrounding ice wedges has left the central area in a relatively elevated position. Ice Lens A dominantly horizontal, lens-shaped body of ice of any dimension. View Example Image Ice Segregation The formation of discrete layers or lenses of segregated ice in freezing mineral or organic soils, as a result of the migration and subsequent freezing of pore water. Ice Wedge A massive, generally wedge-shaped body with its apex pointing downward, composed of foliated or vertically banded, commonly white, ice. Ice-wedge Polygon A network of ice wedges defining the boundaries of a geometric polygon in plan view. Intrusive Ice Ice formed from water injected into soils or rocks. Latent Heat Of Fusion The amount of heat required to melt all ice (or freeze all pore water) in a unit mass of soil or rock. For pure water this quantity is 334 J g-1. Low-center Polygon An ice-wedge polygon in which thawing of ice-rich permafrost has left the central area in a relatively depressed position. Mass Wasting (mass Movement) Downslope movement of soil or rock on or near the earth?s surface under the influence of gravity. Massive Ice A comprehensive term used to describe large masses of ground ice, including ice wedges, pingo ice, buried ice, and large ice lenses. Mean Annual Air Temperature (MAAT) Mean annual temperature of the air, measured at standard screen height above the ground surface. Mean Annual Ground -surface Temperature (MAGST) Mean annual temperature at the surface of the ground. Mean Annual Ground Temperature (MAGT) Mean annual temperature of the ground at a specified depth. N-factor The ratio of the freezing or thawing index at the ground surface to that derived from air temperature records. Palsas Permafrost mounds ranging from about 0.5 to about 10 m in height and exceeding about 2 m in average diameter, comprising (1) aggradation forms and (2) degradation forms. The term ?palsa? is a descriptive term to which an adjectival modifier prefix can be attached to indicate formative processes. See Washburn (1983) and Nelson et al. (1992). Patterned Ground A general term for any ground surface exhibiting a discernibly ordered, more or less sysmmetrical, morphological pattern of ground and, where present, vegetation. View Example Image Periglacial The conditions, processes, and landforms associated with cold, nonglacial environments, regardless of proximity to past or present glaciers. Permafrost Earth materials that remains continuously at or below 0oC for at least two consecutive years. Permafrost, Continuous Regions in which permafrost occurs nearly everywhere beneath the exposed land surface. At the circumpolar scale the term continuous permafrost zone refers to a broad area, crudely conformable with latitude, in which permafrost is laterally continuous. See Nelson and Outcalt (1987). Permafrost, Discontinuous Regions in which permafrost is laterally discontinuous owing to heterogeneity of material properties, subsurface water, and surface cover. Permafrost, Dry Permafrost containing neither free water nor ice. Permafrost, Ice-rich Permafrost containing excess ice. Pingo A perennial frost mound consisting of a core of massive ice produced primarily by injection of water, and covered with soil and vegetation. Retrogressive Thaw Slump A slope failure resulting from thawing if ice-rich permafrost. Seasonally Frozen Ground Ground that freezes and thaws annually. Solifluction A general term referring to the slow downslope flow of saturated unfrozen earth materials over an impermeable substrate (cf. gelifluction). Thaw Consolidation Time-dependent compression resulting from thawing of ice-rich frozen ground and subsequent draining of excess water. Thaw Depth The instantaneous depth below the ground surface to which seasonal thaw has penetrated (cf. active-layer thickness). See Nelson and Hinkel (2003). Thaw Lake A lake whose basin was formed or enlarged by thawing of frozen ground. Hopkins (1949), Washburn (1980, 271). Thaw Settlement Compression of the ground due to loss of excess ground ice and attendant thaw consolidation. Thawing Index (DDT) The cumulative number of degree-days above 0oC for given time period (usually seasonal). Thermal Conductivity The quantity of heat that will flow through a unit area of a substance in unit time under a unit temperature gradient. In permafrost investigations thermal conductivity is usually expressed in W m-1 oC-1 Thermal Erosion Erosion of ice-bearing permafrost by the combined thermal and mechanical action of moving water. Thermal Offset Temperature depression in the upper layer of permafrost, resulting from the combined effects of seasonal differences of thermal conductivity and the operation of nonconductive processes in the active layer. See Williams and Smith (1989) and Nelson et al. (1985). See Goodrich (1982). Thermokarst Terrain Irregular topography resulting from the melting of excess ground ice and subsequent thaw settlement. Zero Curtain Effect Persistence of a nearly constant temperature very close to the freezing point of water during annual freezing (and occasionally thawing) of the active layer. See Outcalt et al. (1990). Copyright \u00a9 2018 United States Permafrost Association Maintained by GW @ EEI", "Permafrost terminology (Book, 1974) [WorldCat.org] Your Web browser is not enabled for JavaScript. Some features of WorldCat will not be available. Home WorldCat Home About WorldCat Help Search Search for Library Items Search for Lists Search for Contacts Search for a Library Create lists, bibliographies and reviews: or Search WorldCat Find items in libraries near you Advanced Search Find a Library Your list has reached the maximum number of items. Please create a new list with a new name; move some items to a new or existing list; or delete some items. Your request to send this item has been completed. Cite/Export Cite/Export Copy a citation APA (6th ed.) Chicago (Author-Date, 15th ed.) Harvard (18th ed.) MLA (7th ed.) Turabian (6th ed.) Export a citation Export to RefWorks Export to EndNote / Reference Manager Export to EasyBib Export to EndNote / Reference Manager(non-Latin) Cancel Note: Citations are based on reference standards. However, formatting rules can vary widely between applications and fields of interest or study. The specific requirements or preferences of your reviewing publisher, classroom teacher, institution or organization should be applied. Print E-mail E-mail All fields are required. The E-mail Address(es) field is required. Please enter recipient e-mail address(es). The E-mail Address(es) you entered is(are) not in a valid format. Please re-enter recipient e-mail address(es). You may send this item to up to five recipients. Enter recipient e-mail address(es): Separate up to five addresses with commas (,) The name field is required. Please enter your name. Enter your name: The subject field is required. Please enter the subject. Subject: The E-mail message field is required. Please enter the message. E-mail Message: I thought you might be interested in this item at http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/2216265 Title: Permafrost terminology Author: Roger James Evan Brown; W O Kupsch Publisher: Ottawa : National Research Council of Canada, 1974. OCLC:2216265 Please verify that you are not a robot. Cancel Share Permalink Permalink Copy this URL to link to this page: Add a review Would you also like to submit a review for this item? Cancel Your list has reached the maximum number of items. Please create a new list with a new name; move some items to a new or existing list; or delete some items. You already recently rated this item. Your rating has been recorded Write a review Rate this item: 1 2 3 4 5 Preview this item Preview this item Checking... Permafrost terminology Author: Roger James Evan Brown; W O Kupsch Publisher: Ottawa : National Research Council of Canada, 1974. Series: National Research Council Canada.; Associate Committee on Geotechnical Research.; Technical memorandum Edition/Format: Print book : National government publication : EnglishView all editions and formats Rating: (not yet rated) 0 with reviews - Be the first. Subjects Frozen ground -- Terminology. Frozen ground. Sols gele\u0301s -- Terminologie. View all subjects More like this Similar Items Add library to Favorites Please choose whether or not you want other users to be able to see on your profile that this library is a favorite of yours. Allow this favorite library to be seen by others Keep this favorite library private Save Cancel Find a copy in the library Finding libraries that hold this item... Details Genre/Form: Terminology Additional Physical Format: Online version:Brown, Roger James Evan, 1931-Permafrost terminology.Ottawa : National Research Council of Canada, 1974(OCoLC)763162001 Material Type: Government publication, National government publication Document Type: Book All Authors / Contributors: Roger James Evan Brown; W O Kupsch Find more information about: Roger James Evan Brown W O Kupsch OCLC Number: 2216265 Notes: Sponsored by the Permafrost Subcommittee, Associate Committee on Geotechnical Research, National Research Council of Canada.\"Contract no. 07KX 31040-4-1025.\"\"NRCC 14274.\" Description: 62 pages : illustrations ; 21 cm. Series Title: National Research Council Canada.; Associate Committee on Geotechnical Research.; Technical memorandum Responsibility: prepared by R.J.E. Brown and W.O. Kupsch. Reviews User-contributed reviews Add a review and share your thoughts with other readers. Be the first. Add a review and share your thoughts with other readers. Be the first. Tags Add tags\u00a0for\u00a0\"Permafrost terminology\". Be the first. Similar Items Related Subjects:(4) Frozen ground -- Terminology. Frozen ground. Sols gele\u0301s -- Terminologie. Sols gele\u0301s -- Canada -- Terminologie. Confirm this request You may have already requested this item. Please select Ok if you would like to proceed with this request anyway. Linked Data More info about Linked Data Primary Entity<http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/2216265> # Permafrost terminology\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Book, schema:CreativeWork ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0library:oclcnum \"2216265\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0library:placeOfPublication <http://id.loc.gov/vocabulary/countries/onc> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0library:placeOfPublication <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/4071589#Place/ottawa> ; # Ottawa\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/4071589#Topic/sols_geles_terminologie> ; # Sols gel\u00e9s--Terminologie\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://dewey.info/class/009/> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/4071589#Topic/sols_geles_canada_terminologie> ; # Sols gel\u00e9s--Canada--Terminologie\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://id.worldcat.org/fast/935479> ; # Frozen ground\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://id.loc.gov/authorities/subjects/sh85052097> ; # Frozen ground\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:author <http://viaf.org/viaf/94377831> ; # Walter Oscar Kupsch\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:bookFormat bgn:PrintBook ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:creator <http://viaf.org/viaf/67709345> ; # Roger James Evan Brown\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:datePublished \"1974\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:exampleOfWork <http://worldcat.org/entity/work/id/4071589> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:genre \"Terminology\"@en ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:genre \"National government publication\"@en ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:genre \"Government publication\"@en ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:inLanguage \"en\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:isPartOf <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/4071589#Series/technical_memorandum_associate_committee_on_geotechnical_research_national_research_council_of_canada> ; # Technical memorandum - Associate Committee on Geotechnical Research, National Research Council of Canada ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:isPartOf <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/4071589#Series/technical_memorandum> ; # Technical memorandum ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:isSimilarTo <http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/763162001> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Permafrost terminology\"@en ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:productID \"2216265\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:publication <http://www.worldcat.org/title/-/oclc/2216265#PublicationEvent/ottawa_national_research_council_of_canada_1974> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:publisher <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/4071589#Agent/national_research_council_of_canada> ; # National Research Council of Canada\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0wdrs:describedby <http://www.worldcat.org/title/-/oclc/2216265> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.Related Entities<http://dewey.info/class/009/>\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Intangible ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/4071589#Agent/national_research_council_of_canada> # National Research Council of Canada\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a bgn:Agent ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"National Research Council of Canada\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/4071589#Organization/national_research_council_canada_associate_committee_on_geotechnical_research> # National Research Council Canada. Associate Committee on Geotechnical Research.\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Organization ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"National Research Council Canada. Associate Committee on Geotechnical Research.\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/4071589#Place/ottawa> # Ottawa\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Place ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Ottawa\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/4071589#Series/technical_memorandum> # Technical memorandum ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a bgn:PublicationSeries ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:creator <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/4071589#Organization/national_research_council_canada_associate_committee_on_geotechnical_research> ; # National Research Council Canada. Associate Committee on Geotechnical Research.\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:hasPart <http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/2216265> ; # Permafrost terminology\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Technical memorandum ;\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/4071589#Series/technical_memorandum_associate_committee_on_geotechnical_research_national_research_council_of_canada> # Technical memorandum - Associate Committee on Geotechnical Research, National Research Council of Canada ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a bgn:PublicationSeries ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:hasPart <http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/2216265> ; # Permafrost terminology\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Technical memorandum - Associate Committee on Geotechnical Research, National Research Council of Canada ;\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/4071589#Topic/sols_geles_canada_terminologie> # Sols gel\u00e9s--Canada--Terminologie\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Intangible ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Sols gel\u00e9s--Canada--Terminologie\"@fr ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/4071589#Topic/sols_geles_terminologie> # Sols gel\u00e9s--Terminologie\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Intangible ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Sols gel\u00e9s--Terminologie\"@fr ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://id.loc.gov/authorities/subjects/sh85052097> # Frozen ground\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Intangible ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Frozen ground\"@en ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://id.loc.gov/vocabulary/countries/onc>\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Place ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0dcterms:identifier \"onc\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://id.worldcat.org/fast/935479> # Frozen ground\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Intangible ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Frozen ground\"@en ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://viaf.org/viaf/67709345> # Roger James Evan Brown\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Person ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:birthDate \"1931\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:familyName \"Brown\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:givenName \"Roger James Evan\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Roger James Evan Brown\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://viaf.org/viaf/94377831> # Walter Oscar Kupsch\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Person ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:birthDate \"1919\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:familyName \"Kupsch\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:givenName \"Walter Oscar\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:givenName \"W. O.\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Walter Oscar Kupsch\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/763162001>\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:CreativeWork ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0rdfs:label \"Permafrost terminology.\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:description \"Online version:\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:isSimilarTo <http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/2216265> ; # Permafrost terminology\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://www.worldcat.org/title/-/oclc/2216265>\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a genont:InformationResource, genont:ContentTypeGenericResource ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/2216265> ; # Permafrost terminology\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:dateModified \"2018-11-11\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0void:inDataset <http://purl.oclc.org/dataset/WorldCat> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://www.worldcat.org/title/-/oclc/2216265#PublicationEvent/ottawa_national_research_council_of_canada_1974>\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:PublicationEvent ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:location <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/4071589#Place/ottawa> ; # Ottawa\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:organizer <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/4071589#Agent/national_research_council_of_canada> ; # National Research Council of Canada\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:startDate \"1974\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.Content-negotiable representationsTurtle (text/turtle)JSON-LD (application/ld+json)RDF/XML (application/rdf+xml)N-TRIPLES (text/plain)HTML+RDFa (text/html) Languages: \u010cesky \u00a0|\u00a0 Deutsch \u00a0|\u00a0 English \u00a0|\u00a0 Espa\u00f1ol \u00a0|\u00a0 Fran\u00e7ais \u00a0|\u00a0 Italiano \u00a0|\u00a0 Nederlands \u00a0|\u00a0 Portugu\u00eas \u00a0|\u00a0 \u0e20\u0e32\u0e29\u0e32\u0e44\u0e17\u0e22 \u00a0|\u00a0 \ud55c\uad6d\uc5b4 \u00a0|\u00a0 \u65e5\u672c\u8a9e \u00a0|\u00a0 \u4e2d\u6587(\u7e41\u9ad4) \u00a0|\u00a0 \u4e2d\u6587(\u7b80\u4f53) You: Sign In | Register | My WorldCat | My Lists | My Watchlist | My Reviews | My Tags | My Saved Searches WorldCat: Home | About | Help | Search Legal: Copyright \u00a9 2001-2019 OCLC. All rights reserved. | Privacy Policy | Terms and Conditions WorldCat is the world's largest library catalog, helping you find library materials online. Learn more \u203a\u203a Follow WorldCat: Please sign in to WorldCat\u00a0Don't have an account? You can easily\u00a0create a free account. User Name: Password: Remember me on this computer Cancel Forgot your password?", "Wisconsin woman found frozen under vehicle in hospital parking garage dies, suspect arrested | Fox News Fox NewsU.S.WorldOpinionPoliticsEntertainmentBusinessLifestyleTVFox NationRadioMoreExpand / Collapse searchLoginWatch TV\u2630Hot TopicsU.S.CrimeMilitaryEducationTerrorImmigrationEconomyPersonal FreedomsFox News InvestigatesWorldU.N.ConflictsTerrorismDisastersGlobal EconomyEnvironmentReligionScandalsOpinionPoliticsExecutiveSenateHouseJudiciaryForeign policyPollsElectionsEntertainmentCelebrity NewsMoviesTV NewsMusic NewsStyle NewsEntertainment VideoBusinessMarketsPoliticsTechnologyFeaturesBusiness LeadersLifestyleFood + DrinkCars + TrucksTravel + OutdoorsHouse + HomeFitness + Well-beingStyle + BeautyFamilyScienceArchaeologyAir & SpacePlanet EarthWild NatureNatural ScienceDinosaursTechSecurityInnovationDronesComputersVideo GamesMilitary TechHealthHealthy LivingMedical ResearchMental HealthCancerHeart HealthChildren's HealthTVShowsPersonalitiesWatch LiveFull EpisodesShow ClipsNews Clips About CareersCollege StudentsFox Around the WorldAdvertise With UsAd ChoicesMedia RelationsCompliance Other Fox NationFox News ShopFox News GoFox News RadioFox News InsiderNewslettersAlertsPodcastsApps & ProductsFox NewsTerms of UsePrivacy PolicyClosed Captioning PolicyHelp This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. \u00a92019 FOX News Network, LLC. All rights reserved. All market data delayed 20 minutes. FacebookTwitterGoogle+InstagramRSSEmailADVERTISEMENTHomicidePublished January 28Wisconsin woman found frozen under vehicle in hospital parking garage dies, suspect arrested By Travis Fedschun | Fox NewsFacebookTwitterFlipboardCommentsPrintEmail Carlie Beaudin, 33, died Friday after she was found unconscious and frozen under a vehicle in a parking garage. (Medical College of Wisconsin)A 33-year-old nurse practitioner in Wisconsin died Friday soon after she was found frozen and bleeding underneath a vehicle in a hospital parking deck, officials said.Carlie Beaudin was discovered in the parking structure at Froedtert Hospital in Milwaukee County after deputies were dispatched to the area around 3:45 a.m. and came across a vehicle that crashed into the wall of the garage.Authorities found the 33-year-old unconscious underneath and bleeding from the head. She was also\u00a0frozen to the ground and had a weak pulse.She was freed from underneath the vehicle and transported to the hospital, where she was pronounced dead at 4:21 a.m., according to FOX6.LOUISIANA SUSPECT IN KILLING OF 5 CAPTURED IN VIRGINIA AFTER MANHUNT, POLICE SAYAt a news conference, Milwaukee County Sheriff Earnell Lucas said a 27-year-old man was taken into custody in the case. The 33-year-old died after her body was found frozen underneath a vehicle in a parking deck at Froedtert Hospital. Additional details about the case, including any possible connection between the victim and suspect, were not released by officials as of Monday afternoon. Authorities were still reviewing surveillance video from the parking structure but had classified Baudin&apos;s death as a homicide.SUSPECT IN 1992 COLD CASE MURDER STAYED FRIENDS WITH VICTIM&apos;S FAMILYThe victim&apos;s husband, Nick Beaudin, told FOX6 his wife was \"incredibly nurturing\" and had won a DAISY award for her work in nursing. When authorities found Carlie Beaudin, she had a weak pulse and was bleeding from the head, police said. (FOX6)\"Our family is suffering, and it&apos;s a tragedy,\" he told the television station. \"She loved to sing opera. She spent a month in Italy, singing opera. She just loved to sing.\"CLICK HERE FOR THE FOX NEWS APPHospital officials said that Carlie was an employee with the Medical College of Wisconsin since 2014 and Froedtert Hospital from 2007 to 2014.\"Her presence was felt by all who knew her, providing both warmth and strength to patients as well as mentorship to new advanced practice providers\u00a0and nurses,\" Froedtert Hospital officials said in a statement to FOX6. \"We ask for the community to respect the privacy of her family and co-workers as they grieve this tragedy.\"Travis Fedschun is a reporter for FoxNews.com. Follow him on Twitter @travfed Trending in USSouthern border at 'breaking point' after more than 76,000 illegal immigrants tried crossing in February, officials sayExtradition delay sought for suspect who blamed panhandlerMichigan official says evidence 'compelling' in murder caseAlabama tornado claims children, seniors among victimsADVERTISEMENTU.S.CrimeMilitaryEducationTerrorImmigrationEconomyPersonal FreedomsFox News InvestigatesWorldU.N.ConflictsTerrorismDisastersGlobal EconomyEnvironmentReligionScandalsOpinionPoliticsExecutiveSenateHouseJudiciaryForeign policyPollsElectionsEntertainmentCelebrity NewsMoviesTV NewsMusic NewsStyle NewsEntertainment VideoBusinessMarketsPoliticsTechnologyFeaturesBusiness LeadersLifestyleFood + DrinkCars + TrucksTravel + OutdoorsHouse + HomeFitness + Well-beingStyle + BeautyFamilyScienceArchaeologyAir & SpacePlanet EarthWild NatureNatural ScienceDinosaursTechSecurityInnovationDronesComputersVideo GamesMilitary TechHealthHealthy LivingMedical ResearchMental HealthCancerHeart HealthChildren's HealthTVShowsPersonalitiesWatch LiveFull EpisodesShow ClipsNews Clips About CareersCollege StudentsFox Around the WorldAdvertise With UsAd ChoicesMedia RelationsCompliance Other Fox NationFox News ShopFox News GoFox News RadioFox News InsiderNewslettersAlertsPodcastsApps & ProductsFacebookTwitterFlipboardGoogle+InstagramRSSEmailFox NewsTerms of UsePrivacy PolicyClosed Captioning PolicyHelpThis material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. \u00a92019 FOX News Network, LLC. All rights reserved. All market data delayed 20 minutes.", "| National Snow and Ice Data Center Skip to main content National Snow and Ice Data Center Home Data Data Sets for Research Brightness Temperature Glaciers Ice Sheets Permafrost Sea Ice Soil Moisture Snow ...search for more Scientific Data Search Support for Researchers Analysis & Imaging Tools Data Announcements Submit Your Data Data Policies User Support Data for Everyone Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Glacier Photograph Collection Greenland Ice Sheet Today MASIE (Daily sea ice extent) Satellite Observations of Arctic Change Sea Ice Index Virtual Globes: Google Earth Sponsored Programs Antarctic Glaciological Data Center Exchange for Local Observations and Knowledge of the Arctic (ELOKA) NOAA at NSIDC NASA Distributed Active Archive Center at NSIDC (NSIDC DAAC) Looking for facts and information? See About the Cryosphere. Research Scientists Research Grants Scientific Publications Informatics Research NSIDC Scientific Expeditions On Thin Ice: Expedition to a Crumbling Ice Shelf Scientists blog from Antarctica and provide a glimpse of what it's like to do research in the field. Read their blog ... News For the Media Newsroom: For the Media For Data Users Data Announcements The Drift Current Conditions Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Greenland Today Satellite Observations of Arctic Change NSIDC In the News Events NSIDC Monthly Highlights Icelights: Answers to your burning questions about ice and climate What's hot in the news around climate and sea ice and what are scientists talking about now? Read more... About About NSIDC NSIDC People Our Sponsors Jobs NSIDC Monthly Highlights Use & Copyright Contact Us Support NSIDC NSIDC's Green Data Center About the Cryosphere Quick Facts All About The Cryosphere All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Frozen Ground All About Sea Ice All About Arctic Climatology & Meteorology Snow, Ice and Climate Change Studying the Cryosphere Photo Gallery Educational Resources Cryosphere Glossary What is the Cryosphere? When scientists talk about the cryosphere, they mean the places on Earth where water is in its solid form, frozen into ice or snow. Read more ... Web pagesData Sets Cryosphere Glossary - Choose a Topic - climatology and meteorology freshwater ice frozen ground or permafrost glaciers icebergs and ice shelves ice sheets sea ice snow Search the Glossary: A | B | C | D | E | F | G | H | I | J | K | L | M | N | O | P | Q | R | S | T | U | V | W | X | Y | Z | all ablation(1) combined processes (such as sublimation, fusion or melting, evaporation) which remove snow or ice from the surface of a glacier or from a snow-field; also used to express the quantity lost by these processes (2) reduction of the water equivalent of a snow cover by melting, evaporation, wind and avalanches. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorologyglacierssnow ablation areathe area of a glacier where more glacier mass is lost than gained.Topic:\u00a0glaciers ablation hollowsdepressions in the snow surface caused by the sun or warm, gusty wind.Topic:\u00a0glaciers ablation morainemound or layer of moraine in the ablation zone of a glacier; the rock has been plucked from the mountainside by the moving glacier and is melting out on the ice surface.Topic:\u00a0glaciers ablation seasonperiod during which glaciers lose more mass than they gain; usually coincides with summer.Topic:\u00a0glaciers ablation zonearea or zone of a glacier where snow and ice ablation exceed accumulation. Topic:\u00a0glaciers absolute differencethe difference, taken without regard to sign, between the values of two variables absolute errorthe difference between the measured or inferred value of a quantity and its actual value. absolute humidity(1) the ratio of the mass of water vapor to the volume occupied by a mixture of water vapor and dry air (2) mass of water contained in a unit volume of moist air. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology accretiongrowth of a cloud or precipitation particle by the collision and union of a frozen particle (ice crystal or snowflake) with a super-cooled liquid droplet which freezes on impact. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology accumulationall processes by which snow or ice are added to a glacier, this is typically the accumulation of snow, which is slowly transformed into ice; other accumulation processes can include avalanches, wind-deposited snow, and the freezing of rain within the snow pack.Topic:\u00a0glaciersclimatology and meteorologysnow accumulation areaarea of a glacier where more mass is gained than lost.Topic:\u00a0glaciers accumulation seasonperiod during which a glacier gains more mass than it loses; usually coincides with winter.Topic:\u00a0glaciers accumulation zonearea of a glacier where more mass is gained than lost.Topic:\u00a0glaciers accuracythe extent to which the readings of an instrument approach the true value of the calculated or measured quantities, supposing that all possible corrections are applied. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology acid precipitationrain or snow containing acidic substances, resulting from the atmospheric pollution mainly with sulfur and nitrogen; acid precipitation has a lower pH than unpolluted rain. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology active air-cooled thermal pilea foundation pile on which a cold air refrigeration system has been installed to remove heat from the ground. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active construction methods in permafrostspecial design and construction methods used for engineering works in permafrost areas where permafrost degradation cannot be prevented.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active ice wedgean ice wedge that is growing as a result of repeated (but not necessarily annual) winter cracking.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active layerthe layer of ground that is subject to annual thawing and freezing in areas underlain by permafrost; also known as seasonal frost. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active liquid refrigerant pilea foundation pile on which a liquid coolant refrigeration system has been installed to remove heat from the ground.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active rock glaciera mass of rock fragments and finer material, on a slope, that contains either an ice core or interstitial ice, and shows evidence of present movement.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrostglaciers active thermokarstthe process by which characteristic landforms are currently developing as a result of thawing of ice-rich permafrost or melting of massive ice. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active-layer failurea general term referring to several forms of slope failures or failure mechanisms commonly occurring in the active layer overlying permafrost. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost active-layer thicknessthe thickness of the layer of the ground that is subject to annual thawing and freeing in areas underlain by permafrost.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost adfreeze strengththe tensile or shear strength which has to be overcome to separate two objects that are bonded together by ice.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost adfreeze/adfreezingthe process by which two objects are bonded together by ice formed between them.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost advancewhen a mountain glacier's terminus extends farther downvalley than before; glacial advance occurs when a glacier flows downvalley faster than the rate of ablation at its terminus. Topic:\u00a0glaciers advectionthe horizontal transfer of air mass properties by the velocity field of the atmosphere. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology advection fogfog which forms in the lower part of a warm moist air mass moving over a colder surface (land or water). Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology aerosolnon-gaseous substances, divided into solid particles or liquid droplets, held in suspension in the atmosphere. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology aggradational icethe additional ground ice formed as a direct result of permafrost aggradation. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost air freezing indexthe cumulative number of degree-days below 0\u00b0 C for the air temperature during a given time period.Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorologyfrozen ground or permafrost air massan extensive body of the atmosphere in which physical properties, particularly temperature and humidity, exhibit only small and continuous differences in the horizontal plane; it may extend over an area of several million square kilometers and over a height of several kilometers. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology air temperaturethe ambient temperature indicated by a thermometer exposed to the air but sheltered from direct solar radiation, or placed in an instrument shelter 1.5 to two meters above ground; also called surface temperature. Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorology air thawing indexthe cumulative number of degree-days above 0\u00b0C for the air temperature during a given period.Topic:\u00a0climatology and meteorologyfrozen ground or permafrost Pages1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 \u2026 next \u203a last \u00bb Find Data Search NSIDC Data NASA Earthdata Search IceBridge Portal Data Collections List Stay Current Arctic Sea Ice News and Analysis Sea Ice Index (Passive microwave satellite data) MASIE (Daily sea ice extent, multi-source) Greenland Today Newsroom Learn About Snow and Ice Icelights: Answers to Your Questions Cryosphere Quick Facts All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Sea Ice Arctic Climatology - A Primer Get Help Knowledge Base Etc. Use & Copyright Web Policy Jobs Home | Contact Us\u00a9 2019, National Snow and Ice Data Center :: Advancing knowledge of Earth's frozen regions", "Permafrost | geology | Britannica.com ENCYCLOP\u00c6DIA BRITANNICA START YOUR FREE TRIAL Log In \u00b7 Join Demystified Quizzes Galleries Lists On This Day Biographies Newsletters START YOUR FREE TRIAL Search Britannica What are you looking for? Search Click here to search Browse popular topics: Crystal Palace Victoria Monroe Doctrine Kepler's laws of planetary motion Open Door policy Bring fact-checked results to the top of your browser search. Learn More. Permafrostgeology Written By: Troy L. P\u00e9w\u00e9 See Article History Alternative Title: ground ice Permafrost, perennially frozen ground, a naturally occurring material with a temperature colder than 0 \u00b0C (32 \u00b0F) continuously for two or more years. Such a layer of frozen ground is designated exclusively on the basis of temperature. Part or all of its moisture may be unfrozen, depending on the chemical composition of the water or the depression of the freezing point by capillary forces. Permafrost with saline soil moisture, for example, may be colder than 0 \u00b0C for several years but contain no ice and thus not be firmly cemented. Most permafrost, however, is consolidated by ice.Division of subarctic and Arctic regions showing distribution of permafrost and glaciers.Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica, Inc.Permafrost with no water, and thus no ice, is termed dry permafrost. The upper surface of permafrost is called the permafrost table. In permafrost areas the surface layer of ground that freezes in the winter (seasonally frozen ground) and thaws in summer is called the active layer. The thickness of the active layer depends mainly on the moisture content, varying from less than a foot in thickness in wet, organic sediments to several feet in well-drained gravels.Permafrost forms and exists in a climate where the mean annual air temperature is 0 \u00b0C or colder. Such a climate is generally characterized by long, cold winters with little snow and short, relatively dry, cool summers. Permafrost, therefore, is widespread in the Arctic, sub-Arctic, and Antarctica. It is estimated to underlie 20 percent of the world\u2019s land surface. Read More on This Topic glacial landform: Permafrost, patterned ground, solifluction deposits, and pingos Permafrost is ground that remains perennially frozen (see permafrost). It covers about 20\u201325 percent of the Earth\u2019s land surface today. The \u201cactive layer\u201d of soil close to the surface of permafrost regions undergoes many seasonal and daily freeze-thaw\u2026 Distribution in the Northern Hemisphere Permafrost zones Permafrost is widespread in the northern part of the Northern Hemisphere, where it occurs in 85 percent of Alaska, 55 percent of Russia and Canada, and probably all of Antarctica. Permafrost is more widespread and extends to greater depths in the north than in the south. It is 1,500 metres (5,000 feet) thick in northern Siberia, 740 metres thick in northern Alaska, and thins progressively toward the south. Most permafrost can be differentiated into two broad zones; the continuous and the discontinuous, referring to the lateral continuity of permafrost. In the continuous zone of the far north, permafrost is nearly everywhere present except under the lakes and rivers that do not freeze to the bottom. The discontinuous zone includes numerous permafrost-free areas that increase progressively in size and number from north to south. Near the southern boundary, only rare patches of permafrost have been found to exist. In addition to its widespread occurrence in the Arctic and subarctic areas of the Earth, permafrost also exists at lower latitudes in areas of high elevation. This type of perennially frozen ground is called Alpine permafrost. Although data from high plateaus and mountains are scarce, measurements taken below the active surface layer indicate zones where temperatures of 0 \u00b0C or colder persist for two or more years. The largest area of Alpine permafrost is in western China, where 1,500,000 square kilometres (580,000 square miles) of permafrost are known to exist. In the contiguous United States, Alpine permafrost is limited to about 100,000 square kilometres in the high mountains of the west. Permafrost occurs at elevations as low as 2,500 metres in the northern states and at about 3,500 metres in Arizona. A unique occurrence of permafrost\u2014one that has no analogue on land\u2014lies under the Arctic Ocean, on the northern continental shelves of North America and Eurasia. This is known as subsea or offshore permafrost. Study of permafrost Although the existence of permafrost had been known to the inhabitants of Siberia for centuries, scientists of the Western world did not take seriously the isolated reports of a great thickness of frozen ground existing under northern forest and grasslands until 1836. Then, Alexander Theodor von Middendorff measured temperatures to depths of approximately 100 metres of permafrost in the Shargin shaft, an unsuccessful well dug for the governor of the Russian-Alaskan Trading Company, at Yakutsk, and estimated that the permafrost was 215 metres thick. Since the late 19th century, Russian scientists and engineers have actively studied permafrost and applied the results of their learning to the development of Russia\u2019s north. In a similar way, prospectors and explorers were aware of permafrost in the northern regions of North America for many years, but it was not until after World War II that systematic studies of perennially frozen ground were undertaken by scientists and engineers in the United States and Canada. Since exploitation of the great petroleum resources on the northern continental shelves began in earnest in the 1970s, investigations into subsea permafrost have progressed even more rapidly than have studies of permafrost on land. Alpine permafrost studies had their beginning in the study of rock glaciers in the Alps of Switzerland. Although ice was known to exist in rock glaciers, it was not until after World War II that investigation by geophysical methods clearly demonstrated slow movement of perennial ice\u2014i.e., permafrost. In the 1970s and \u201980s, detailed geophysical work and temperature and borehole examination of mountain permafrost began in Russia, China, and Scandinavia, especially with regard to construction in high mountain and plateau areas. Origin and stability of permafrost Air temperature and ground temperature In areas where the mean annual air temperature becomes colder than 0 \u00b0C, some of the ground frozen in the winter will not be completely thawed in the summer; therefore, a layer of permafrost will form and continue to grow downward gradually each year from the seasonally frozen ground. The permafrost layer will become thicker each winter, its thickness controlled by the thermal balance between the heat flow from the Earth\u2019s interior and that flowing outward into the atmosphere. This balance depends on the mean annual air temperature and the geothermal gradient. The average geothermal gradient is an increase of 1 \u00b0C (1.8 \u00b0F) for every 30 to 60 metres of depth. Eventually the thickening permafrost layer reaches an equilibrium depth at which the amount of geothermal heat reaching the permafrost is on the average equal to that lost to the atmosphere. Thousands of years are required to attain a state of equilibrium where permafrost is hundreds of feet thick. The annual fluctuation of air temperature from winter to summer is reflected in a subdued manner in the upper few metres of the ground. This fluctuation diminishes rapidly with depth, being only a few degrees at 7.5 metres, and is barely detectable at 15 metres. The level of zero amplitude, at which fluctuations are hardly detectable, is 9 to 15 metres. If the permafrost is in thermal equilibrium, the temperature at the level of zero amplitude is generally regarded as the minimum temperature of the permafrost. Below this depth the temperature increases steadily under the influence of heat from the Earth\u2019s interior. The temperature of permafrost at the depth of minimum annual seasonal change varies from near 0 \u00b0C at the southern limit of permafrost to \u221210 \u00b0C (14 \u00b0F) in northern Alaska and \u221213 \u00b0C (9 \u00b0F) in northeastern Siberia. As the climate becomes colder or warmer, but maintaining a mean annual temperature colder than 0 \u00b0C, the temperature of the permafrost correspondingly rises or declines, resulting in changes in the position of the base of permafrost. The position of the top of permafrost will be lowered by thawing when the climate warms to a mean annual air temperature warmer than 0 \u00b0C. The rate at which the base or top of permafrost is changed depends not only on the amount of climatic fluctuation but also on the amount of ice in the ground and the composition of the ground, conditions that in part control the geothermal gradient. If the geothermal gradient is known and if the surface temperature remains stable for a long period of time, it is, therefore, possible to predict from a knowledge of the mean annual air temperature the thickness of permafrost in a particular area that is remote from bodies of water. Climatic change Permafrost is the result of present climate. Many temperature profiles show, however, that permafrost is not in equilibrium with present climate at the sites of measurement. Some areas show, for example, that climatic warming since the last third of the 19th century has caused a warming of the permafrost to a depth of more than 100 metres. In such areas much of the permafrost is a product of a colder, former climate.melting permafrost: avalanchesLearn about researchers studying melting permafrost on mountains in order to predict and protect against avalanches.Contunico \u00a9 ZDF Enterprises GmbH, Mainz The distribution and characteristics of subsea permafrost point to a similar origin. At the height of the glacial epoch, especially about 20,000 years ago, most of the continental shelf in the Arctic Ocean was exposed to polar climates for thousands of years. These climates caused cold permafrost to form to depths of more than 700 metres. Subsequently, within the past 10,000 years, the Arctic Ocean rose and advanced over a frozen landscape to produce a degrading relict subsea permafrost. The perennially frozen ground is no longer exposed to a cold atmosphere, and the salt water has caused a reduction in strength and consequent melting of the ice-rich permafrost (which is bonded by freshwater ice). The temperature of subsea permafrost, near \u22121 \u00b0C (30 \u00b0F), is no longer as low as it was in glacial times and is therefore sensitive to warming from geothermal heat and to the encroaching activities of humans. It is thought that permafrost first occurred in conjunction with the onset of glacial conditions about three million years ago, during the late Pliocene Epoch. In the subarctic at least, most permafrost probably disappeared during interglacial times and reappeared in glacial times. Most existing permafrost in the subarctic probably formed in the cold (glacial) period of the past 100,000 years. Local thickness The thickness and areal distribution of permafrost are directly affected by snow and vegetation cover, topography, bodies of water, the interior heat of the Earth, and the temperature of the atmosphere, as mentioned earlier. Effects of climate The most conspicuous change in thickness of permafrost is related to climate. At Barrow, Alaska, U.S., the mean annual air temperature is \u221212 \u00b0C (10 \u00b0F), and the thickness is 400 metres. At Fairbanks, Alaska, in the discontinuous zone of permafrost in central Alaska, the mean annual air temperature is \u22123 \u00b0C (27 \u00b0F), and the thickness is about 90 metres. Near the southern border of permafrost, the mean annual air temperature is about 0 or \u22121 \u00b0C, and the perennially frozen ground is only a few feet thick. If the mean annual air temperature is the same in two areas, the permafrost will be thicker where the conductivity of the ground is higher and the geothermal gradient is less. A.H. Lachenbruch of the U.S. Geological Survey reports an interesting example from northern Alaska. The mean annual air temperatures at Cape Simpson and Prudhoe Bay are similar, but permafrost thickness is 275 metres at Cape Simpson and about 650 metres at Prudhoe Bay because rocks at Prudhoe Bay are more siliceous and have a higher conductivity and a lower geothermal gradient than rocks at Cape Simpson. Effects of water bodies Bodies of water, lakes, rivers, and the sea have a profound effect on the distribution of permafrost. A deep lake that does not freeze to the bottom during the winter will be underlain by a zone of thawed material. If the minimum horizontal dimension of the deep lake is about twice as much as the thickness of permafrost nearby, there probably exists an unfrozen vertical zone extending all the way to the bottom of permafrost. Such thawed areas extending all the way through permafrost are widespread under rivers and sites of recent rivers in the discontinuous zone of permafrost and under major, deep rivers in the far north. Under the wide floodplains of rivers in the subarctic, the permafrost is sporadically distributed both laterally and vertically. Small, shallow lakes that freeze to the bottom each winter are underlain by a zone of thawed material, but the thawed zone does not completely penetrate permafrost except near the southern border of permafrost. Effects of solar radiation, vegetation, and snow cover Inasmuch as south-facing hillslopes receive more incoming solar energy per unit area than other slopes, they are warmer; permafrost is generally absent on these in the discontinuous zone and is thinner in the continuous zone. The main role of vegetation in permafrost areas is to shield perennially frozen ground from solar energy. Vegetation is an excellent insulating medium and removal or disturbance of it, either by natural processes or by humans, causes thawing of the underlying permafrost. In the continuous zone the permafrost table may merely be lowered by the disturbance of vegetation, but in a discontinuous zone permafrost may be completely destroyed in certain areas. Snow cover also influences heat flow between the ground and the atmosphere and therefore affects the distribution of permafrost. If the net effect of timely snowfalls is to prevent heat from leaving the ground in the cold winter, permafrost becomes warmer. Actually, local differences in vegetation and snowfall in areas of thin and warm permafrost are critical for the formation and existence of the perennially frozen ground. Permafrost is not present in areas of the world where great snow thicknesses persist throughout most of the winter. Ice content Types of ground ice The ice content of permafrost is probably the most important feature of permafrost affecting human life in the north. Ice in the perennially frozen ground exists in various sizes and shapes and has definite distribution characteristics. The forms of ground ice can be grouped into five main types: (1) pore ice, (2) segregated, or Taber, ice, (3) foliated, or wedge, ice, (4) pingo ice, and (5) buried ice. 1. Pore ice, which fills or partially fills pore spaces in the ground, is formed by pore water freezing in situ with no addition of water. The ground contains no more water in the solid state than it could hold in the liquid state. 2. Segregated, or Taber, ice includes ice films, seams, lenses, pods, or layers generally 0.15 to 13 centimetres (0.06 to 5 inches) thick that grow in the ground by drawing in water as the ground freezes. Small ice segregations are the least spectacular but one of the most extensive types of ground ice, and engineers and geologists interested in ice growth and its effect on engineering structures have studied them considerably. Such observers generally accept the principle of bringing water to a growing ice crystal, but they do not completely agree as to the mechanics of the processes. Pore ice and Taber ice occur both in seasonally frozen ground and in permafrost. 3. Foliated ground ice, or wedge ice, is the term for large masses of ice growing in thermal contraction cracks in permafrost. 4. Pingo ice is clear, or relatively clear, and occurs in permafrost more or less horizontally or in lens-shaped masses. Such ice originates from groundwater under hydrostatic pressure. 5. Buried ice in permafrost includes buried sea, lake, and river ice and recrystallized snow, as well as buried blocks of glacier ice in permafrost climate. World estimates of the amount of ice in permafrost vary from 200,000 to 500,000 cubic kilometres (49,000 to 122,000 cubic miles), or less than 1 percent of the total volume of the Earth. It has been estimated that 10 percent by volume of the upper 3 metres of permafrost on the northern Coastal Plain of Alaska is composed of foliated ground ice (ice wedges). Taber ice is the most extensive type of ground ice, and in places it represents 75 percent of the ground by volume. It is calculated that the pore and Taber ice content in the depth between 0.5 and 3 metres (surface to 0.5 metre is seasonally thawed) is 61 percent by volume, and between 3 and 9 metres it is 41 percent. The total amount of pingo ice is less than 0.1 percent of the permafrost. The total ice content in the permafrost of the Arctic Coastal Plain of Alaska is estimated to be 1,500 cubic kilometres, and below 9 metres most of that is present as pore ice. Ice wedges The most conspicuous and controversial type of ground ice in permafrost is that formed in large ice wedges or masses with parallel or subparallel foliation structures. Most foliated ice masses occur as wedge-shaped, vertical, or inclined sheets or dikes 2.5 centimetres to 3 metres wide and 0.3 to 9 metres high when viewed in transverse cross section. Some masses seen on the face of frozen cliffs may appear as horizontal bodies a few centimetres to 3 metres in thickness and 0.3 to 14 metres long, but the true shape of these ice wedges can be seen only in three dimensions. Ice wedges are parts of polygonal networks of ice enclosing cells of frozen ground 3 to 30 metres or more in diameter. Origins The origin of ground ice was first studied in Siberia, and discussions in print of the origin of large ground-ice masses in perennially frozen ground of North America have gone on since Otto von Kotzebue recorded ground ice in 1816 at a spot now called Elephant\u2019s Point in Eschscholtz Bay of Seward Peninsula. The theory for the origin of ice wedges now generally accepted is the thermal contraction theory that, during the cold winter, polygonal thermal contraction cracks, a centimetre or two wide and a few metres deep, form in the frozen ground; then when, in early spring, water from the melting snow runs down these tension cracks and freezes, a vertical vein of ice is produced that penetrates into permafrost; when the permafrost warms and re-expands during the following summer, horizontal compression produces upturning of the frozen sediment by plastic deformation; then during the next winter, renewed thermal tension reopens the vertical ice-cemented crack, which may be a zone of weakness; another increment of ice is added in the spring when meltwater again enters and freezes. Over the years the vertical wedge-shaped mass of ice is produced. Active wedges, inactive wedges, and ice-wedge casts Ice wedges may be classified as active, inactive, and ice-wedge casts. Active ice wedges are those that are actively growing. The wedge may not crack every year, but during many or most years cracking does occur, and an increment of ice is added. Ice wedges require a much more rigorous climate to grow than does permafrost. The permafrost table must be chilled to \u221215 to \u221220 \u00b0C (5 to \u22124 \u00b0F) for contraction cracks to form. On the average, it is assumed that ice wedges generally grow in a climate where the mean annual air temperature is \u22126 or \u22128 \u00b0C (21 or 18 \u00b0F) or colder. In regions with a general mean annual temperature only slightly warmer than \u22126 \u00b0C, ice wedges occasionally form in restricted cold microclimate areas or during cold periods of a few years\u2019 duration. The area of active ice wedges appears to roughly coincide with the continuous permafrost zone. From north to south across the permafrost area in North America, a decreasing number of wedges crack frequently. The line dividing zones of active and inactive ice wedges is arbitrarily placed at the position where it is thought most wedges do not frequently crack. Inactive ice wedges are those that are no longer growing. The wedge does not crack in winter and, therefore, no new ice is added. A gradation between active ice wedges and inactive ice wedges occurs in those wedges that crack rarely. Inactive ice wedges have no ice seam or crack extending from the wedge upward to the surface in the spring. The wedge top may be flat, especially if thawing has lowered the upper surface of the wedge at some time in the past. Ice wedges in the world are of several ages, but none appear older than the onset of the last major cold period, about 100,000 years ago. Wedges dated by radiocarbon analyses range from 3,000 to 32,000 years in age. In many places in the now temperate latitudes of the world, in areas of past permafrost, ice wedges have melted, and resulting voids have been filled with sediments collapsing from above and the sides. These ice-wedge casts are important as paleoclimatic indicators and indicate a climate of the past with at least a mean annual air temperature of \u22126 or \u22128 \u00b0C or colder. Page 1 of 2 Next page Surface manifestations of permafrost and seasonally frozen ground Learn More in these related Britannica articles: glacial landform: Permafrost, patterned ground, solifluction deposits, and pingos Permafrost is ground that remains perennially frozen (see permafrost). It covers about 20\u201325 percent of the Earth\u2019s land surface today. The \u201cactive layer\u201d of soil close to the surface of permafrost regions undergoes many seasonal and daily freeze-thaw\u2026 Canada: Tundra The permafrost (persistently frozen ground) is easily damaged by heavy equipment and by oil spills. The Inuit, who fish, hunt, and trap for a living, are directly affected by abuses of the ecology.\u2026 Arctic: Terrain Permanently frozen ground (permafrost) covers nearly one-quarter of the Earth\u2019s surface. In northern Alaska and Canada scattered observations suggest that permafrost is 800 to 1,500 feet deep; it is generally deeper in northern Siberia. The deepest known permafrost is in northern Siberia, where it exceeds 2,000 feet. The\u2026 North America: Temperature \u2026has permanently frozen subsoil (permafrost) and is under snow and ice most of the year. The frequently frozen seas interlacing the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, together with innumerable northern lakes, allow for an enormous chilling effect on the air above, and the temperatures for these huge regions are 6 to\u2026 global warming: Carbon cycle feedbacks \u2026of the warming of Arctic permafrost (on land) and further methane release at the continental margins of the oceans (a few hundred metres below sea level). The current average atmospheric methane concentration of 1,750 ppb is equivalent to 3.5 gigatons (3.5 billion tons) of carbon. There are at least 400\u2026 ADDITIONAL MEDIAMore About Permafrost14 references found in Britannica articlesAssorted Referenceshydrates In hydrateice formation In ice formationperiglacial landforms In glacial landform: Permafrost, patterned ground, solifluction deposits, and pingosPleistocene Epoch In Pleistocene Epoch: Periglacial environmentspolar barrens and tundra In tundra: Soils In tundra: Effects of human activities and climate change In polar ecosystem: Polar environmentspotential methane emission In global warming: Carbon cycle feedbackspresence in Gelisol In Gelisoltaiga In taiga: SoilsView More Additional Reading Article History Article Contributors Feedback Corrections? Updates? Help us improve this article! Contact our editors with your feedback. Permafrost Quick Facts View Media Page related topicsIce formation Pingo Thermokarst Pingo ice Inactive ice wedge Hydrolaccolith Open-system pingo Ice-wedge cast Active ice wedge Closed-system pingo Similar Topics Glacier Iceberg Ice in lakes and rivers Sea ice Polynya Ice jam Pack ice Featured On Britannica Unbound / History Britannica Celebrates Women\u2019s History Month Quiz / Literature & Language The Bront\u00eb Sisters Companion / Science The Anthropocene Epoch: Adding Humans to the Chart of Geologic Time Demystified / Science What Causes the Northern and Southern Lights? Britannica Lists & Quizzes Science Quiz Biodiversity Loss Animals List Gorilla gorilla, Sula sula, and Other Animals Whose Names Are Tautonyms\u2014the Same for Genus and Species History Quiz Women\u2019s History: Famous Firsts History List Military Commanders of World War I Trending Topics Crystal Palace Victoria Monroe Doctrine Kepler's laws of planetary motion Open Door policy Black Death F. Scott Fitzgerald James Watt Agricultural Adjustment Administration Mexican Revolution Connect with Britannica Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Pinterest IntroductionDistribution in the Northern HemispherePermafrost zonesStudy of permafrostOrigin and stability of permafrostAir temperature and ground temperatureClimatic changeLocal thicknessEffects of climateEffects of water bodiesEffects of solar radiation, vegetation, and snow coverIce contentTypes of ground iceIce wedgesOriginsActive wedges, inactive wedges, and ice-wedge castsSurface manifestations of permafrost and seasonally frozen groundAreas underlain by permafrostPolygonal groundThermokarst formationsPingosFeatures related to seasonal frostPatterned groundSoil flowProblems posed by permafrostPermafrost engineeringGeneral issuesPermafrost thawing and frost heavingDevelopment in permafrost areasStructures on pilesHighways and railroadsAgricultureOffshore structures Edit Mode Permafrost Geology Tips for Editing Leave Edit Mode Submit Tips For Editing We welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. You can make it easier for us to review and, hopefully, publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind. Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience. You may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered. Any text you add should be original, not copied from other sources. At the bottom of the article, feel free to list any sources that support your changes, so that we can fully understand their context. (Internet URLs are the best.) Your contribution may be further edited by our staff, and its publication is subject to our final approval. Unfortunately, our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions. Submit Thank You for Your Contribution! Our editors will review what you've submitted, and if it meets our criteria, we'll add it to the article. Please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors, and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed. Uh Oh There was a problem with your submission. Please try again later. Close Keep Exploring Britannica Volcano Volcano, vent in the crust of the Earth or another planet or satellite, from which issue eruptions of\u2026 Read this Article Fascism Fascism, political ideology and mass movement that dominated many parts of central, southern, and eastern\u2026 Read this Article English language English language, West Germanic language of the Indo-European language family that is closely related\u2026 Read this Article View More Stay Connected Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Pinterest Newsletters About Us About Our Ads Partner Program Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use \u00a92019 Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica, Inc. Menu Home Demystified Quizzes Galleries Lists On This Day Biographies Newsletters Login Join Contents Contents Page 1 of 2 Permafrost geology Article Media Print Print Please select which sections you would like to print: Table Of Contents Cite Share SHARE Facebook Twitter Feedback Feedback Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login). Select feedback type: Select a type (Required) Factual Correction Spelling/Grammar Correction Link Correction Additional Information Other Submit Feedback If you prefer to suggest your own revision of the article, you can go to edit mode (requires login). Thank you for your feedback Our editors will review what you\u2019ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. Join Britannica's Publishing Partner Program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work! Share SHARE Facebook Twitter Search \u00d7 close Britannica Celebrates 100 Women Trailblazers", "Glossary of Water Terminology Continents Africa Antarctica Arctic Asia Caribbean Central America Europe Middle East North America Oceania South America Islands Countries Popular United States United Kingdom Canada Russia North Korea All Countries End of list Answers Travel Society Economics Environment World Facts Worldatlas on facebook World Map/ Glossary of Water Terminology Glossary of Water Terminology A acid: a substance that has a pH value between 0 and 7 acid deposition (\"acid rain\"): - water that falls to or condenses on the Earth's surface as rain, drizzle, snow, sleet, hail, dew, frost, or fog with a pH of less than 5.6 acre-foot: the amount of water needed to cover one acre of land one foot deep; about 326,000 gallons adhesion: the attraction between molecules that causes matter to cling to or stick to other matter adjudication: a court determination of water rights for a groundwater basin or a stream; adjudication sets priorities during shortages aeration: the addition of air to water or to the pores in soil aesthetic: sensitive to beauty alkaline: the quality of being bitter due to alkaline content (pH is greater than 7) alluvial: sediment deposited by flowing water, such as in a riverbed alum: aluminum sulfate: a chemical, which is mixed into water to cause particles in the water to clump together so they can be removed anadramous: any fish which spends a portion of its life cycle in freshwater and a portion in the sea aquifer: an underground layer of rock, sediment or soil that is filled or saturated with water aquifer system: a heterogeneous body of introduced permeable and less permeable material that acts as a water-yielding hydraulic unit of regional extent aqueduct: man-made canal or pipeline used to transport water B bacteria - any of a number of one-celled organisms, some of which cause disease base - a substance that has a pH value between 7 and 14 basin - a groundwater reservoir defined by the overlying land surface and underlying aquifers that contain water stored in the reservoir benefit - an advantage to be gained in a trade-off benefit/cost analysis - a process of evaluating the advantages and disadvantages of a proposed purchase or project BMPs (Best Management Practices) - structural or management practices which are implemented to reduce pollution (e.g., using a permeable material for parking lots to reduce urban runoff) boiler scale - mineral deposits from water, such as those found inside pipes or teakettles bond - a promise to repay money borrowed, plus interest, over a specified period of time bond issue - a means of raising large amounts of money for major projects by selling bonds brackish - water containing too much salt to be useful to people but less salt than ocean water by-products - something produced in addition to the principal product C capillarity - the process by which water rises through rock, sediment or soil caused by the cohesion between water molecules and an adhesion between water and other materials that \"pulls\" the water upward capital cost - all the implements, equipment, machinery and inventory used in the production of goods and services cesspool - a covered hole or pit for receiving sewage chloramination - the treatment of a substance, such as drinking water, with chlorine and ammonia (chloramines) in order to kill disease-causing organisms chlorination - the treatment of a substance, such as drinking water, with chlorine in order to kill disease-causing organisms cloud - a mass of suspended water droplets and/or ice crystals in the atmosphere cloud droplets - the tiny liquid pieces of water that many clouds are made of. When cloud droplets join together and become heavy enough they form raindrops. coagulation - the process, such as in treatment of drinking water, by which dirt and other suspended particles become chemically \"stuck together\" so they can be removed from water cohesion - the ability of a substance to stick to itself and pull itself together coliform - a group of bacteria used as indicators of microbiological contamination colloidal suspension - a method of sediment transport in which water turbulence (movement) supports the weight of the sediment particles, thereby keeping them from settling out or being deposited condensation - water vapor changing back into liquid condensation surfaces - small particles of matter, such as dust and salt suspended in the atmosphere, which aid the condensation of water vapor in forming clouds confined aquifer - an aquifer that is bound above and below by dense layers of rock and contains water under pressure conjunctive use - the planned use of groundwater in conjunction with surface water to optimize total water resources conservation - saving; not wasting; using water wisely constituents - parts of a whole; components consumer - one who consumes or uses economic goods or services contaminate - to make unfit for use; to pollute contractor - a water agency that signs a contract to acquire given amounts of water from another agency, usually under specified conditions contour plowing - plowing done in accordance with the natural outline or shape of the land by keeping the furrows or ditches at the same elevation as much as possible to reduce runoff and erosion cost - the outlay or expenditure (as of money, effort or sacrifice) made to achieve an object or advantage cost-effective - able at least to pay for itself or make a profit county water authority - a public water district serving a county-wide area cubic foot of water - the amount of water needed to fill a cube that is one foot on all sides; about 7.5 gallons D dam - a structure built to hold back a flow of water debt service - the repayment of borrowed money, plus interest deficit - the amount by which a sum of money falls short of an expected amount delta - fan-shaped area at the mouth of a river (where seas are relatively calm) demand - the quantity of goods or services that consumers are willing and able to buy at a given price deposition - the process of dropping or getting rid of sediments by an erosional agent such as a river or glacier; also called sedimentation desalination - the process of removing salt from seawater or brackish water dew - moisture in the air that condenses on solid surfaces when the air is saturated with water vapor dew point - the temperature at which the air becomes saturated with water vapor discharge - the amount of water flowing past a location in a stream/river in a certain amount of time - usually expressed in liters per second or gallons per minute disinfect - to destroy harmful microorganisms dissolve - to enter into a solution divert - to direct a flow away from its natural course divide - a ridge or high area of land that separates one drainage basin from another drainage basin - all of the area drained by a river system drought - a prolonged period of below-average precipitation E economic benefit - a gain that can be measured in dollars economic cost - a cost involved in a trade-off that requires spending money ecosystem - an interacting network of groups of organisms together with their non-living or physical environment efficiency - effective operation as measured by a comparison of production with cost endangered species - a species of animal or plant threatened with extinction environment - the surroundings that affect the growth and development of an organism environmental impacts - factors that affect organisms and the surroundings of organisms Environmental Impact Report (EIR) - a state-mandated written summary of the positive and negative effects on the environment caused by the construction and operation of a project erosion - the processes (including soil erosion) of picking up sediments, moving sediments, shaping sediments, and depositing sediments by various agents; erosional agents include streams, glaciers, wind and gravity Escherichia coli (E. coli) - a common bacterium found in fecal matter; member of the coliform group evaporation - water changing into vapor and rising into the air exchange - the act of trading goods or services for those produced by people who are located elsewhere expense - something spent (such as money, time or effort) to secure a benefit or bring about a result F factors of production - the resource inputs involved in the production of goods and services: for example, labor, land and capital feces - waste excreted from the bowels of humans and animals filtration - passing water through coal, sand and gravel to remove particles filtration plant - place where water is cleaned and made safe to drink financing cost - the fees charged by financial specialists and the interest charged on money borrowed to pay for a project fish ladder - a device to help fish swim around a dam fishery - the aquatic region in which a certain species of fish lives floc - clumps of impurities removed from water during the purification process; formed when alum is added to impure water flocculation - a step in water filtration in which alum is added to cause particles to clump together floodplain - area formed by fine sediments spreading out in the drainage basin on either side of the channel of a river as a result of the river's fluctuating water volume and velocity fog - clouds that form at the Earth's surface frost - the ice that forms on surfaces as a result of the temperature of that surface reaching freezing before the air becomes saturated with water G gallon - a unit of measure equal to four quarts or 128 fluid ounces geyser - a thermal spring that erupts intermittently and to different heights above the surface of the Earth; eruptions occur when water deep in the spring is heated enough to turn into steam, which forces the liquid water above it out into the air glacial striations - lines carved into rock by overriding ice, showing the direction of glacial movement glacier - a large mass of ice formed on land by the compacting and recrystallization of snow; glaciers survive from year to year, and creep downslope or outward due to the stress of their own weight groundwater - water under ground, such as in wells, springs and aquifers gullying - small-scale stream erosion H habitat - the place or type of site where a plant or animal naturally or normally lives and grows hail - transparent or layered (ice and snow) balls or irregular lumps of solid water hardness - a characteristic of water determined by the levels of calcium and magnesium hatcheries - a place for hatching fish eggs humus - decomposed bits of plant and animal matter in the soil hydroelectric plant - a power plant that produces electricity from the power of rushing water turning turbine-generators hydrologic cycle - the natural recycling process powered by the sun that causes water to evaporate into the atmosphere, condense and return to earth as precipitation hydrology - the scientific study of the behavior of water in the atmosphere, on the Earth's surface and underground I iceberg - large chunks of ice that break off of coastal glaciers and float away igneous - rock solidified from a molten state, such as lava and obsidian impermeable - having a texture that does not permit water to move through quickly imported water - water brought into an area from a distant source, such as from one part of a state to another via an aqueduct impound - to confine in an enclosure, such as impounding water in a reservoir impurity - any component which causes another substance to become contaminated indicator - a device or substance used to show the presence of another substance infiltration (also called percolation) - the entrance or flow of water into the soil, sediment or rocks of the Earth's surface inorganic - chemicals not containing the element carbon interest - payments made to an investor for the use of borrowed money intrusion - the entrance of an unwanted element, such as saltwater, into freshwater supplies inundation - covering over or flooding, such as flood waters covering a valley irrigation - supplying water to agriculture by artificial means, such as pumping water onto crops in an area where rainfall is insufficient L labor - the mental and/or physical talents contributed by people for the production of goods or services lactose - a white organic substance made from milk that is used in infant foods, bakery products and confections; also used as a \"culture\" in laboratories landfill - an open area where trash is buried leach - to remove components from the soil by the action of water trickling through levees - dikes or other embankments which contain water within a given course local runoff - water running off a local area, such as rainfall draining into a nearby creek M manufacturer - one who makes a product marginal land - land which, in its natural state, is not well suited for a particular purpose, such as raising crops member agency - one of 27 member public water providers associated with the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California, from which it purchases water and o whose board it is represented microorganism - an organism of microscopic size, such as bacterium migratory - moving from one area to another on a seasonal basis mitigation - a way in which an agency may offset negative environmental impacts of a project or make the impacts less serious mulch - material spread on the ground to reduce soil erosion and evaporation of water; include hay, plastic sheeting and wood chips municipal water district - a public water provider, owned and operated by more than one city government, which supplies water to its member cities N natural environment - all living and nonliving things that occur naturally on the earth; not made nomad - a wanderer, a person or animal which moves from place to place non-economic benefit - a gain resulting from a trade-off that cannot be measured in dollars nonpoint source pollution - pollution which comes from diffuse sources such as urban and agricultural runoff NPDES (National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System) permits - permits issued to point sources for the purpose of limiting pollution in discharges O organic - any chemical containing the element carbon overdraft - condition that occurs in a groundwater basin when pumping exceeds the amount of replenishment over a period of years ozone - a gas that is bubbled through water to kill germs P pathogenic - capable of causing disease percolation - water soaking into the ground perennial yield - maximum quantity of water that can be annually withdrawn from a groundwater basin over a long period of time (during which water supply conditions approximate average conditions) without developing an overdraft condition permeability - the capacity or ability of a porous rock, sediment, or soil to allow the movement of water through its pores PEROXONE - a combination of peroxide and ozone used to kill germs in water pH - a relative scale of how acidic or basic (alkaline) a material is; the scale goes from 0 to 14; 7 is neutral, acids have pH values less than 7 and bases have pH values higher than 7 photosynthesis - process in which chlorophyll-containing cells convert light into chemical energy, forming organic compounds from inorganic compounds pipeline - carries water underground to homes and businesses plankton - minute plants and animals floating in bodies of water; often a major source of nutrition for larger aquatic life forms pollutant - any inorganic or organic substance that contaminates air, water or soil point source pollution - pollution which comes from a well-defined source such as sewage treatment plant effluent from industrial dischargers. . .for purposes of the Clean Water Act, agricultural return flows are not regulated as a point source pore spaces - the open areas, or spaces, in soil, sediments, and rocks that are filled by air or water porosity - a measure of the ratio of open space within a rock or soil to its total volume POTWs (Public Owned Treatment Works) - sewage treatment plants precipitation - water falling toward the Earth's surface in the form of rain, drizzle, hail, sleet, or snow pumping lift - distance water must be lifted in a well from the pumping level to the ground surface pumping plant - facility that lifts water up and over hills R reclaimed water - wastewater that has been cleaned so that it can be reused for most purposes except drinking recharge - increases in groundwater storage from precipitation, infiltration from streams, or human activity (artificial recharge), such as putting surface water into spreading basins relative humidity - the ratio of the amount of moisture in the air to the maximum amount of moisture the air could hold under the same conditions; usually expressed as a percentage reservoir - a pond or lake where water is collected and stored until it is needed rills - small grooves, furrows, or channels in soil made by water flowing down over its surface; also another name for a stream - usually a small stream runoff - liquid water that travels over the surface of the Earth, moving downward due to the law of gravity; runoff is one way in which water that falls as precipitation returns to the ocean S saltation - the movement of sand or fine sediment by short jumps above a streambed under the influence of a water current too weak to keep it permanently suspended in the moving water salinity - saltiness saturation - the condition of being filled to capacity sea ice - solid water that forms when ocean or sea water freezes section 319 grants - grants for nonpoint source pollution programs sediments - fragments of material produced by weathering and erosion of rocks sedimentation - the process of particles in water settling to the bottom of a tank selenium - a non-metallic element in the same chemical group as sulfur; its compounds are harmful to wildlife or people when found above certain levels in water septic tank - a sewage disposal tank in which bacteria decompose waste sheet wash - a flow of rainwater that covers the entire ground surface with a thin film and is not concentrated into streams sleet - precipitation that consists of clear pellets of ice; sleet is formed when raindrops fall through a layer of cold air and freeze snow - precipitation that consists of frozen flakes formed when water vapor accumulates on ice crystals, going directly to the ice phase soil - sediment on or near the Earth's surface that is formed by the chemical and physical weathering of rocks as well as the decay of living matter soil subsidence - the lowering of the normal level of the ground, usually due to over pumping of water or oil from wells spawn - to produce or deposit eggs, as those of aquatic animals spring - groundwater seeping or flowing out of the Earth's surface; springs occur where the water table reaches the surface SRF (State Revolving Fund) - funding, in the form of loans, available for the control of point and nonpoint source pollution steam - water vapor that rises from boiling water stream - the type of runoff where water flows in a channel downhill because of the pull of gravity sublimation - formation of a gas from a solid, or vice-versa, without passing through the liquid phase subsidence - sinking of the land surface due to a number of factors, of which groundwater extraction is one subsurface water - all water - solid, liquid or gaseous - that occurs beneath the Earth's surface; located below the water table in the zone of saturation surface runoff - water flowing along the ground into rivers, lakes, and oceans surface water - all water, fresh and salty, on the Earth's surface suspended - the state of floating in water rather than being dissolved in it suspension - a method of sediment transport in which air or water turbulence supports the weight of the sediment particles, thereby keeping them from settling out or being deposited T thermal spring - a warm or hot water spring; many occur in regions of recent volcanic activity and are fed by water heated by contact with hot rocks far below Earth's surface till - a deposit of sediment formed under a glacier, consisting of an unlayered mixture of clay, silt, sand, and gravel ranging widely in size and shape topsoil - the top layer of soil; topsoil can grow better crops partly because it has more organic matter (humus), allowing it to hold more water than lower soil layers toxic - poisonous; harmful to living organisms transpiration - evaporation of water through the leaves of plants trihalomethanes, trichloroethylene, perchloroethylene - organic compounds which may be harmful to health at certain levels in drinking water turbidity - the state of having sediment or foreign particles suspended or stirred up in water U unconfined aquifer - an aquifer that discharges and recharges with an upper surface that is the water table unsaturated zone - the subsurface zone, usually starting at the land surface and ending at the water table, that includes both water and air in spaces between rocks usable storage capacity - the quantity of groundwater of acceptable quality that can be economically withdrawn from storage W wastewater - water that has waste material in it wastewater treatment - cleaning wastewater water cycle - the movement of water from the air to and below the Earth's surface and back into the air water quality - the condition of water as it relates to impurities water reclamation - treating wastewater so that it can be used again water table - (1) the boundary in the ground between where the ground is saturated with water (zone of saturation) and where the ground is filled with water and air (zone of aeration); (2) the upper surface of the saturated zone that determines the water level in a well in an unconfined aquifer water vapor - the gaseous state of water watershed - a geographical portion of the Earth's surface from which water drains or runs off to a single place like a river; also called a drainage area well - a hole or shaft drilled into the earth to get water or other underground substances X xeriscape - landscaping that doesn't require a lot of water Z zanja - Spanish word for ditch zone of aeration - the portion of the ground from the Earth's surface down to the water table - the zone of aeration is not saturated with water because its pores are filled partly by air and partly by water zone of saturation - the portion of the ground below the water table where all the pores in rock, sediment, and soil are filled with water Other helpful pages on WorldAtlas Map and Details of all 7 Continents The 5 Oceans of the World - Maps and Details How Many Countries are in the World? What and Where is the Ring of Fire? Trending on WorldAtlas The Most Dangerous Cities in the World The Largest Countries in the World 29 Largest Armies In The World Which Place Is Known As The Salad Bowl of the World? The 10 Smallest Countries In The World The 10 Largest Cities in the World The Most Popular Sports in the World The World's Largest Eagles Olive Oil Production by Country This page was last updated on August 13, 2015. Featured On WorldAtlas Which Countries Export the Most Food? The Most Dangerous Cities in the US Countries With The Largest Aging Population In The World Which Team Has Won the Most Super Bowls? Curious About The World? What Is Geography? The Five Themes In Geography What Is a Tide Pool? What is Cultural Appropriation? What is Regionalism? What is the Clash of Civilizations? What are Hieroglyphics? What is a Kleptocracy? Popular On WorldAtlas The Best City Skylines in Europe 10 Countries With The Highest Industrial Outputs In The World The Richest Caribbean Countries Popular Atlas Pages Africa Antarctica Asia Oceania Caribbean Central America Europe Middle East North America South America Arctic Islands USA Canada Definition of Geography 5 Themes of Geography What Is Cartography? What Is a Leap Year? Quizzes US Map Popular Reference Pages Did You Know? Bodies of Water Continents Countries (a list) Country Codes (all) Currency Conversion Current Time (anywhere) Distances Equator Find Any Address Find Any City Flags Hemispheres Latitude and Longitude Map Tests Oceans (all) Outline Maps Populations (cities & countries) Prime Meridian USA Times World Maps United States Area Codes General Information Advertise with us Contact Us About Us Privacy Statement Copyright information Graphic Maps Featured Photos Featured Videos Want to Become a Writer? All maps, graphics, flags, photos and original descriptions \u00a9 2019 worldatlas.com Worldatlas on Facebook", "Mend | Covers For Reactive Tailings Located in Permafrost Regions Review A propos de nous \u00c9v\u00e9nements \u00e0 venir Liens connexes Rapports Recherche avanc\u00e9e Pr\u00e9vision Pr\u00e9vention et Contr\u00f4le Couvertures aqueuses Couvertures s\u00e8ches R\u00e9sidus et st\u00e9riles Traitement Actif Passif Autres Surveillance Transfert de la technologie et les \u00e9tudes de cas Publications Contactez-nous English 1.61.4 - Covers For Reactive Tailings Located in Permafrost Regions Review - October 01, 2004 Les r\u00e9percussions du drainage acide sur l\u2019environnement sont nettement reconnues dans les r\u00e9gions du Canada d\u00e9pourvues de perg\u00e9lisol. Au Canada, les mines abandonn\u00e9es, en exploitation et \u00e0 l\u2019\u00e9tat de projets sont nombreuses dans les r\u00e9gions \u00e0 perg\u00e9lisol. Ces mines nordiques disposent d\u2019un outil suppl\u00e9mentaire pour lutter contre la production d\u2019acide, soit le gel des rejets et leur conservation dans cet \u00e9tat. Cet outil doit faire l\u2019objet d\u2019une \u00e9valuation approfondie afin qu\u2019il soit possible de d\u00e9terminer o\u00f9 et comment il peut \u00eatre utilis\u00e9 \u00e9conomiquement par l\u2019industrie mini\u00e8re en vue de la fermeture des parcs \u00e0 r\u00e9sidus et des haldes de st\u00e9riles. Les couvertures plac\u00e9es sur les r\u00e9sidus et les st\u00e9riles r\u00e9actifs dans les r\u00e9gions d\u00e9pourvues de perg\u00e9lisol ont \u00e9t\u00e9 \u00e9tudi\u00e9es et soumises \u00e0 des essais sur le terrain durant de nombreuses ann\u00e9es. Un bon nombre de mines en exploitation situ\u00e9es dans la zone de perg\u00e9lisol canadienne encapsulent, ou envisagent d\u2019encapsuler, les r\u00e9sidus r\u00e9actifs dans le perg\u00e9lisol. Cette technique peut \u00eatre appliqu\u00e9e dans les r\u00e9gions \u00e0 perg\u00e9lisol o\u00f9 la temp\u00e9rature de l\u2019air est suffisamment froide et \u00e0 condition de pr\u00e9voir pour la couche active. Situ\u00e9e \u00e0 la surface du sol, cette couche d\u00e9g\u00e8le chaque \u00e9t\u00e9, ce qui peut potentiellement entra\u00eener l\u2019oxydation des r\u00e9sidus ou des st\u00e9riles pendant l\u2019\u00e9t\u00e9. Pour encapsuler des r\u00e9sidus ou des st\u00e9riles dans du perg\u00e9lisol, il faut placer sur ces r\u00e9sidus ou ces st\u00e9riles un mat\u00e9riau (p. ex., une couverture) qui emprisonnera la zone de d\u00e9gel saisonnier annuel, ou couche active, et pr\u00e9viendra ainsi le d\u00e9gel des r\u00e9sidus ou des st\u00e9riles pr\u00e8s de la surface. L\u2019encapsulation dans le perg\u00e9lisol semble \u00eatre une bonne option pour les r\u00e9sidus r\u00e9actifs lorsqu\u2019il s\u2019agit de perg\u00e9lisol continu, parce qu\u2019elle ne n\u00e9cessite pas de 1) couverture s\u00e8che comme une formation morainique argileuse, un mat\u00e9riau qui est g\u00e9n\u00e9ralement absent dans la r\u00e9gion du perg\u00e9lisol continu ou de 2) couverture aqueuse, qui est difficile \u00e0 maintenir en raison des taux d\u2019\u00e9vaporation \u00e9lev\u00e9s dans la plus grande partie de la r\u00e9gion \u00e0 perg\u00e9lisol du Canada. De plus, les couvertures aqueuses co\u00fbtent cher dans les r\u00e9gions arctiques \u00e9loign\u00e9es parce que les co\u00fbts de construction, d\u2019inspection et d\u2019entretien y sont plus \u00e9lev\u00e9s qu\u2019ailleurs. La mise \u00e0 l\u2019essai r\u00e9cente de quatre couvertures construites sur des r\u00e9sidus r\u00e9actifs dans du perg\u00e9lisol continu fournit de l\u2019information sur les param\u00e8tres qui r\u00e9gissent la conception d\u2019une couverture destin\u00e9e \u00e0 maintenir les r\u00e9sidus dans un \u00e9tat de gel. Ces \u00e9tudes de cas ex\u00e9cut\u00e9es \u00e0 Nanisivik, Raglan, Lupin et Rankin Inlet correspondent \u00e0 diverses op\u00e9rations de gestion des r\u00e9sidus; approches en mati\u00e8re de conception de la couverture; et conditions climatiques et physiques. \u00c9videmment, il n\u2019est pas question d\u2019encapsuler des r\u00e9sidus dans du perg\u00e9lisol lorsque les temp\u00e9ratures de l\u2019air ne sont pas suffisamment basses pour cr\u00e9er un perg\u00e9lisol continu. Le perg\u00e9lisol se d\u00e9finit comme \u00e9tant un terrain dont la temp\u00e9rature demeure \u00e0 0 \u00baC ou sous 0 \u00baC durant deux ann\u00e9es cons\u00e9cutives mais, aux fins de l\u2019encapsulation dans le perg\u00e9lisol, il est pr\u00e9f\u00e9rable que la temp\u00e9rature de ce dernier \u00e0 la profondeur d\u2019amplitude annuelle z\u00e9ro soit de \u2013 2 \u00baC ou moins \u00e9lev\u00e9e. Cette temp\u00e9rature du sol se traduit par une temp\u00e9rature annuelle moyenne de l\u2019air (TAMA) d\u2019environ \u2013 8 \u00baC lorsque les fluctuations \u00e0 court terme de la temp\u00e9rature annuelle de l\u2019air sont d\u2019environ 1,5 \u00baC et que la diff\u00e9rence entre la TAMA et la temp\u00e9rature annuelle moyenne de la surface du sol est de quelque 4,5 \u00baC. Le crit\u00e8re ci-dessus ne tient pas compte du r\u00e9chauffement de la plan\u00e8te, lequel peut avoir d\u2019importantes r\u00e9percussions sur le perg\u00e9lisol. Nichols a document\u00e9 le r\u00e9chauffement de la plan\u00e8te d\u00e8s 1975. Au moyen de la datation de la tourbe par le carbone 14, il a d\u00e9montr\u00e9 que la Terre a connu une courte p\u00e9riode glaciaire il y a environ 300 ans et qu\u2019elle se r\u00e9chauffe depuis. Trois tendances \u00e0 un r\u00e9chauffement progressivement plus \u00e9lev\u00e9 ont \u00e9t\u00e9 enregistr\u00e9es depuis. Les observations indiquent que pr\u00e8s de 50 % des glaciers des Alpes suisses ont fondu entre 1850 et 1985 et qu\u2019une proportion suppl\u00e9mentaire de 25 % a fondu depuis 1985 (allocution prononc\u00e9e \u00e0 2003 Permafrost Conference). Anisimov et Fitzharris (2001) ont signal\u00e9 que les temp\u00e9ratures de l\u2019air ont augment\u00e9 en g\u00e9n\u00e9ral de 2 \u00e0 4 \u00ba C partout dans le monde et qu\u2019elles se sont accrues de 5 \u00baC/100 ans depuis le d\u00e9but du 20e si\u00e8cle en certains endroits du nord de la Sib\u00e9rie et de l\u2019Alaska. Une hausse de la tendance au r\u00e9chauffement a \u00e9t\u00e9 observ\u00e9e en Alaska (Esch, 1990) et au Canada depuis 1980 (Dyke et Brooks, 2000). Les donn\u00e9es sur la TAMA \u00e0 certains sites canadiens sont fournis dans ce rapport. \u00c0 l\u2019heure actuelle, l\u2019encapsulation des r\u00e9sidus est en g\u00e9n\u00e9ral faisable au nord-ouest du fleuve Mackenzie dans les Territoires du Nord-Ouest, dans tout le Nunavut et dans l\u2019extr\u00eame-nord du Qu\u00e9bec. Cependant, en raison de la tendance au r\u00e9chauffement de la plan\u00e8te, l\u2019encapsulation dans le perg\u00e9lisol dans certaines r\u00e9gions nordiques des Territoires du Nord-Ouest et du Qu\u00e9bec pourrait ne pas \u00eatre durable dans 100 \u00e0 200 ans. Les mines qui envisagent l\u2019encapsulation des r\u00e9sidus dans le perg\u00e9lisol devront d\u00e9terminer quel impact le r\u00e9chauffement de la plan\u00e8te aura sur leur design. Le concept du design dans le cas de l\u2019encapsulation des r\u00e9sidus r\u00e9actifs dans le perg\u00e9lisol consiste \u00e0 fournir un mat\u00e9riau de couverture suffisamment \u00e9pais pour que la couche active (d\u00e9gel annuel) soit maintenue dans la couverture. L\u2019\u00e9paisseur de la couche active est fonction de la temp\u00e9rature de l\u2019air au site, de la teneur en eau des diverses couches de sol/roche, de la couverture v\u00e9g\u00e9tale, de l\u2019orientation de la pente, de la couleur du mat\u00e9riau de surface (alb\u00e9do), de l\u2019\u00e9paisseur de la neige (qui varie selon la topographie locale) et d\u2019autres facteurs. Comme ces facteurs varient grandement d\u2019un site \u00e0 l\u2019autre et m\u00eame quelquefois au sein d\u2019un m\u00eame site, l\u2019\u00e9paisseur de la couche active peut se situer entre 0,5 m et 5 m. Il est important de tenir compte des facteurs particuliers au site dans la conception des couvertures. Les facteurs dominants de l\u2019\u00e9paisseur de la couche active dans les quatre cas pr\u00e9sent\u00e9s sont la temp\u00e9rature de l\u2019air et la teneur en eau. Les autres facteurs sont moins importants pour ces raisons : couverture v\u00e9g\u00e9tale \u2013 \u00e9tablir une couverture v\u00e9g\u00e9tale dans les r\u00e9gions \u00e0 perg\u00e9lisol prend beaucoup de temps; on peut raisonnablement supposer qu\u2019aucune v\u00e9g\u00e9tation ne couvrira les r\u00e9sidus ou les st\u00e9riles durant une bonne p\u00e9riode; orientation de la pente \u2013 la majeure partie des r\u00e9sidus n\u2019ont presque pas de pente; couleur \u2013 la plupart des mat\u00e9riaux pour les couvertures ont des couleurs similaires; cependant, la couleur pourrait \u00eatre un facteur, comme le montrent les essais r\u00e9alis\u00e9s \u00e0 Nanisivik. Apr\u00e8s l\u2019\u00e9tablissement de la r\u00e9partition de la temp\u00e9rature de l\u2019air au site, la teneur en eau du mat\u00e9riau de la couverture est le plus important param\u00e8tre pour gouverner la profondeur maximale du d\u00e9gel ou de l\u2019\u00e9paisseur \u00e0 donner \u00e0 la couverture. L\u2019effet de la teneur en eau du mat\u00e9riau de la couverture sur l\u2019\u00e9paisseur de la couche active est illustr\u00e9 par les quatres \u00e9tudes de cas pr\u00e9sent\u00e9s dans ce rapport et par la conception propos\u00e9e pour la couverture \u00e0 Diavik. Raglan - Une couverture de 2,4 m d\u2019\u00e9paisseur a \u00e9t\u00e9 choisie. Elle consiste en une couche de st\u00e9riles concass\u00e9s qui a une \u00e9paisseur de 1,2 m et qui repose sur un esker de sable et de gravier concass\u00e9s d\u2019une \u00e9paisseur de 1,2 m. Selon les mesures effectu\u00e9es, la base de la couche active se trouve \u00e0 1,9 m de profondeur (pour une temp\u00e9rature de cong\u00e9lation de 0\u00ba C). Le sol d\u00e9g\u00e8le sur 1,9 m. Nanisivik - Cinq cellules exp\u00e9rimentales ont \u00e9t\u00e9 construites. La couverture a 2 m d\u2019\u00e9paisseur et la stratigraphie est h\u00e9t\u00e9rog\u00e8ne. Aux cinq sites, l\u2019\u00e9paisseur de la couche active varie selon la teneur en eau de la couverture, allant de 1 m pour une teneur de 34 % \u00e0 pr\u00e8s de 1,5 m pour une teneur de 7 %. La profondeur moyenne du gel aux cinq sites varie de 1,0 \u00e0 1,4 m. La p\u00e9n\u00e9tration du d\u00e9gel la moins \u00e9lev\u00e9e correspond \u00e0 la teneur en eau de la couverture la plus \u00e9lev\u00e9e. Lupin - La couverture a une \u00e9paisseur de 0,6 \u00e0 1,6 m et est compos\u00e9e de sable et de gravier d\u2019esker. L\u2019\u00e9paisseur de la couche active est fonction de la nappe phr\u00e9atique. Elle varie de 1,3 m lorsqu\u2019il n\u2019y a pas de couverture et que les r\u00e9sidus sont enti\u00e8rement satur\u00e9s jusqu\u2019\u00e0 1,8 m lorsque la nappe phr\u00e9atique se trouve \u00e0 la base de la couverture d\u2019une \u00e9paisseur de 1,6 m. Rankin Inlet - La couverture est constitu\u00e9e de 1 m de sable et de gravier d\u2019esker. Le point de cong\u00e9lation est abaiss\u00e9 jusqu\u2019\u00e0 environ -4\u00ba C en raison d\u2019une infiltration d\u2019eau de mer et de la dissolution des sulfures oxyd\u00e9s. L\u2019on estime que la couche active a une \u00e9paisseur de pr\u00e8s de 5 m, compte tenu du rabaissement du point de cong\u00e9lation et de la glace visible. L\u2019on estime que le sol d\u00e9g\u00e8le jusqu\u2019\u00e0 2,7 m de profondeur \u00e0 0\uf0b0 C. Les quatre \u00e9tudes de cas d\u00e9montrent que, pour r\u00e9duire le plus possible l\u2019\u00e9paisseur de la couche active situ\u00e9e dans une couverture, la teneur en eau de la couverture doit \u00eatre la plus \u00e9lev\u00e9e possible. \u00c9videmment, la teneur en eau la plus \u00e9lev\u00e9e que peut avoir une couverture est la saturation compl\u00e8te. Cependant, la saturation partielle ou totale de la couverture pourrait d\u00e9boucher sur la formation, dans la couverture, d\u2019une couche d\u2019eau stagnante qui pr\u00e9vient l\u2019oxydation sans qu\u2019il soit n\u00e9cessaire d\u2019avoir recours au gel (Li et coll., 1997). Le NEDEM a d\u00e9j\u00e0 montr\u00e9 dans certaines de ses \u00e9tudes (NEDEM 2.22.2) qu\u2019on obtient une barri\u00e8re efficace contre la diffusion de l\u2019oxyg\u00e8ne si l\u2019on maintient le degr\u00e9 de saturation d\u2019une couche du sol \u00e0 un niveau plus \u00e9lev\u00e9 que 85 \u00e0 90 %. D\u2019apr\u00e8s un concept de design fourni dans NEDEM 6.1, les travaux effectu\u00e9s sur une couverture d\u2019eau stagnante par Li et coll. (1997) et des essais sur colonne r\u00e9alis\u00e9s par CANMET (NEDEM 2.12.1e), Lupin a choisi une couverture avec zone satur\u00e9e en vue de la fermeture de ses cellules situ\u00e9es dans le parcs \u00e0 r\u00e9sidus (Holubec, 2002). Les r\u00e9sidus seront recouverts d\u2019une couche de sable et de gravier d\u2019esker d\u2019une \u00e9paisseur de 1 m qui maintiendra une zone de saturation \u00e0 la base de la couverture. Les r\u00e9sultats du suivi des conditions thermiques et de la nappe phr\u00e9atique dans les cellules recouverts en 1995 et en 1998 confirment la validit\u00e9 de ce concept. Rapport complet [PDF] A propos de nous Rapports Publications Contactez-nous English", "Permafrost map of Canada We use cookies to make interactions with our website easy and meaningful, to better understand the use of our services, and to tailor advertising. For further information, including about cookie settings, please read our Cookie Policy . By continuing to use this site, you consent to the use of cookies.Got ittopSee all \u203a19 CitationsDownload citationShare Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Google+ RedditRequest full-textPermafrost map of CanadaArticle\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0January 1968\u2002with\u200223 ReadsCite this publication R. J. E. BrownAbstractThe distribution of permafrost in Canada and the influence of climatic and terrain factors is discussed. This is followed by a review of engineering considerations including site investigation techniques and the design, construction and maintenance of structures in permafrost regions. L'auteur examine la r\u00e9partition du perg\u00e9lisol au Canada et les facteurs climatiques et topographiques qui causent sa formation. Il fait ensuite une r\u00e9capitulation des crit\u00e8res d'ing\u00e9nierie, y compris les techniques d'\u00e9tude du terrain d' implantation des ouvrages dans les r\u00e9gions \u00e0 perg\u00e9lisol, leur conception, construction et entretien. RESDo you want to read the rest of this article?Request full-text Citations (19)References (0)... In 1967, the late Roger J.E. Brown pubIished a map of the distribution of permafrost in Canada, and included the first attempt at mapping its distribution along the Rocky Mountains (Brown 1967). In 1973, the authors commenced a programme to provide more-detailed information sponsored by the Division of Building Research of the National Research Council and the Department of Geography, University of Calgary. ...Permafrost distribution along the Rocky Mountains in AlbertaArticleFull-text availableJan 1982 Stuart Arthur Harris R. J. E. BrownTwenty-eight drill holes ranging from 15 to 150 m in depth have been instrumented with strings of thermistors and thermocouples at six study sites between Plateau Mountain and Jasper, south-west Alberta. Measurements are made every four weeks and indicate that the lower limit of continuous permafrost forms a dome-shape with its centre at Bow Summit, at 2575 m. The limit lies around 2130 m at Jasper and 2270 m at Plateau Mountain. This dome appears to be due to increased snowfall around the ice caps and glaciers, and there may be an inverse relationship between the elevation of the glaciation limit and that of the lower limit of continuous permafrost at a given latitude. In areas of low winter snowfall, the zone of discontinuous permafrost usually extends only 25 m in elevation below the lower limit of continuous permafrost but probably increases in altitudinal range as mean winter snowfall increases. Relict permafrost occurs at Plateau Mountain, which is the only site which shows no signs of overriding by Pleistocene glaciers. Even there, present-day heating and cooling waves extend downwards throughout the layers being studied. It is therefore suggested that the \"zone of zero amplitude\" be renamed the \"zone of minimal amplitude\" defined as being where the amplitude over a period of two years is less than 0.20 degrees C. Des chapelets de thermistor et de thermocouples ont \u00e9t\u00e9 install\u00e9s dans vingt-huit forages d'une profondeur de 15 \u00e0 150 m en six emplacements entre le mont Plateau et Jasper dans le sud-ouest de l'Alberta. Des mesures effectu\u00e9es toutes les quatre semaines indiquent que la limite inf\u00e9rieure du perg\u00e9lisol continu forme un d\u00f4me dont le centre est \u00e0 2575 m au sommet Bow. Cette limite se trouve \u00e0 2130 m \u00e0 Jasper et \u00e0 2270 m au mont Plateau. Le d\u00f4me semble attribuable \u00e0 des chutes de neige accrues autour des calottes glaciaires ainsi que des glaciers et il peut exister une relation inverse entre l'altitude de la limite de la zone recouverte par la glace et l'altitude de la limite inf\u00e9rieure du perg\u00e9lisol continu pour une latitude donn\u00e9e. Dans les r\u00e9gions o\u00f9 les pr\u00e9cipitations neigeuses sont faibles en hiver, la zone de perg\u00e9lisol discontinu ne s'enfonce g\u00e9n\u00e9ralement que de 25 m sous la limite inf\u00e9rieure du perg\u00e9lisol continu, mais son \u00e9paisseur augmente probablement en fonction de l'\u00e9paisseur moyenne des pr\u00e9cipitations neigeuses en hiver. On trouve du perg\u00e9lisol r\u00e9siduel au mont Plateau qui est le seul emplacement qui ne semble pas avoir \u00e9t\u00e9 recouvert par les glaciers au Pl\u00e9istoc\u00e8ne. M\u00eame \u00e0 cet endroit, de nos jours, les ondes de r\u00e9chauffement et de refroidissement s'\u00e9tendent vers le bas \u00e0 l'ensemble des couches \u00e9tudi\u00e9es. Il est par cons\u00e9quent sugg\u00e9 r\u00e9que la \"zone d'amplitude z\u00e9ro\" soit rebaptis\u00e9e \"zone d'amplitude mimimale\" et d\u00e9finie comme \u00e9tant la zone o\u00f9 l'amplitude est inf\u00e9rieure \u00e0 0,20 degr\u00e9s C pendant une p\u00e9riode de deux ans. RESViewShow abstract... Precipitation during almost half of the year is locked in as snowpack. The study area is located near the southern limit of the discontinuous permafrost zone (Brown 1965Brown , 1967). Permafrost exists only at palsa and peat plateau sites (Riley 2003Riley , 2011 Webster 2013, 2014). ...Modelling and mapping permafrost at high spatial resolution using Landsat and Radarsat-2 images in Northern Ontario, Canada: Part 2 \u2013 regional mappingArticleFeb 2016INT J REMOTE SENS James W McLaughlin Brigitte Leblon Armand Larocque Chunping OuPermafrost occurs mainly at high latitudes and is currently subjected to widespread thawing due to global warming, which has significant ecological and socio-economic impacts. One way to map permafrost condition and its change at high spatial resolution is to calculate soil temperatures using a process-based permafrost model, such as the Northern Ecosystem Soil Temperature (NEST) model, based on remote-sensing data. In a previous paper (Ou et al. 2015), we showed that the NEST model can be used to model soil temperatures, frozen depth, and active layer thickness in a warm and discontinuous permafrost area that is located in the Hudson Bay Lowlands in northern Ontario, Canada. In this article, we applied the model over the whole study area to map the distribution of permafrost conditions and their changes from the 1960s to the 2000s at high spatial resolution. Some of the model inputs were estimated based on land-cover and surficial material maps derived from Landsat-5 TM and Radarsat-2 SAR C-HH and C-HV images. By comparison to field observations, we were able to achieve an average mapping accuracy of 99% for both the land-cover and surficial material maps, when both Landsat and Radarsat-2 images were used. In addition, all the 49 field-observed treed and shrub permafrost landform sites found in the study area were correctly identified on the classified image. This spatial modelling study shows that permafrost currently underlies about 9.4% of the land in this area, and varies significantly among land-cover types. With the increases in mean annual air temperature (1.9\u00b0C) and precipitation (2.4%) from the 1960s to the 2000s, the model results show a deepening of active layer by 20.5%. However, the permafrost has persisted in most of the area due to the protection of thick peat. The modelled permafrost extent reduced only from 9.8% to 9.4%.ViewShow abstract... Recent work on M. marmota lends additional credence to the snowpack-survival hypothesis (Farand et al. in prep.), but there has been no additional work concerning whether the mechanism is actually one of snowpack insulation. Specifically, the depth at which soils experience zero annual temperature amplitude (see Brown 1970) has not been related to the depth at which marmots hibernate, or to soil types. Van Vuren and Armitage (1991) suggested that the timing of snow melt, and not the depth of snowpack, may be the critical factor in determining marmot survival. ...Metapopulation ecology of Vancouver Island marmots (Marmota vancouverensis)ThesisFull-text availableDec 1998 Andrew BryantView... The study of permafrost distribution in the Eastern Cordillera of the Rocky Mountains began in 1974, when weather stations equipped with Lambrecht monthly soil temperature recorders, together with ground temperature cables, were placed on mountain tops at key sites. There was no previous work on the climate at permafrost sites and the only permafrost map of Canada was by Brown (1967a). No other long-term weather stations were sited at high elevations in the mountains south of 60\u00b0N where permafrost occurs, hence the need to establish new observation sites. ...Modeling permafrost distribution in the Canadian Rocky Mountains: A GIS-based approach.ArticleFull-text availableJan 2000 J. F. N. Jenson Clarence Woudsma Stuart Arthur HarrisView... Since the range of soil type and ice content is greater for the unconsolidated sediments, the sandstone porosity was kept constant for all simulations to show the range of possible talik growth rates by adjusting the thickness and properties of the loose sediments alone. Modeled volumetric ice content was also varied (30, 40, 50%;Brown, 1968;Sellmann et al., 1975) in the unconsolidated sediments. A total of six thermal models were run for the 1,400-year model duration with differing values of ice content and unconsolidated sediment depth to deter- mine a range of possible talik thicknesses. ...Transient Electromagnetic Surveys for the Determination of Talik Depth and Geometry Beneath Thermokarst LakesArticleFull-text availableOct 2018 Michael C. Angelopoulos Andrea L.T. Creighton Andrew D. Parsekian Christopher Douglas ArpThermokarst lakes are prevalent in Arctic coastal lowland regions and sublake permafrost degradation and talik development contributes to greenhouse gas emissions by tapping the large permafrost carbon pool. Whereas lateral thermokarst lake expansion is readily apparent through remote sensing and shoreline measurements, sublake thawed sediment conditions and talik growth are difficult to measure. Here we combine transient electromagnetic surveys with thermal modeling, backed up by measured permafrost properties and radiocarbon ages, to reveal closed-talik geometry associated with a thermokarst lake in continuous permafrost. To improve access to talik geometry data, we conducted surveys along three transient electromagnetic transects perpendicular to lakeshores with different decadal-scale expansion rates of 0.16, 0.38, and 0.58 m/year. We modeled thermal development of the talik using boundary conditions based on field data from the lake, surrounding permafrost and a borehole, independent of the transient electromagnetics. A talik depth of 91 m was determined from analysis of the transient electromagnetic surveys. Using a lake initiation age of 1400 years before present and available subsurface properties the results from thermal modeling of the lake center arrived at a best estimate talk depth of 80 m, which is on the same order of magnitude as the results from the transient electromagnetic survey. Our approach has provided a noninvasive estimate of talik geometry suitable for comparable settings throughout circum-Arctic coastal lowland regions.ViewShow abstractWildfire effects on permafrost and soil moisture in spruce forests of Interior AlaskaArticleNov 2018J Forest Res Charles Hugny Christopher PotterIn the summer of 2015, hundreds of forest fires burned across the state of Alaska. Several uncontrolled wildfires near the town of Tanana on the Yukon River were responsible for the largest portion of the area burned statewide. In July 2017, field measurements were carried out in both unburned and burned forested areas nearly adjacent to one another, all within 15 miles of the village of Tanana. These surveys were used to first visually verify locations of different burn severity classes, (low, moderate, or high), estimated in 2016 from Landsat images (collected before and after the 2015 Tanana-area wildfires). Surface and soil profile measurements to 30-cm depth at these same locations were collected for evidence of moss layer and forest biomass burning. Soil temperature and moisture content were measured to 30-cm depth, and depth to permafrost was estimated by excavation wherever necessary. Digital thermal infra-red images of the soil profiles were taken at each site location, and root-zone organic layer samples were extracted for further chemical analysis. Results supported the hypothesis that the loss of surface organic layers is a major factor determining post-fire soil water and temperature changes and the depth of permafrost thawing. In the most severely burned forest sites, complete consumption of the living moss organic layer was strongly associated with both warming at the surface layer and increases in soil water content, relative to unburned forest sites. Soil temperatures at both 10-cm and 30-cm depths at burned forest sites were higher by 8\u201310 \u00b0C compared to unburned sites. Below 15 cm, temperatures of unburned sites dropped gradually to frozen levels by 30 cm, while soil temperatures at burned sites remained above 5 \u00b0C to 30-cm depth. The water content measured at 3 cm at burned sites was commonly in excess of 30% by volume, compared to unburned sites. The strong correlation between burn index values and depth to permafrost measured across all sites sampled in July 2017 showed that the new ice-free profile in severely burned forest areas was commonly 50-cm deeper than in unburned soils.ViewShow abstractThe Status and Distribution of Trumpeter Swans (Cygnus buccinator) in the YukonArticleJan 1983 MALCOLM C. DENNINGTONZ DAVID MOSSOPThe presence of a breeding population of Trumpeter Swans (Cygnus buccinator) in the Yukon is established from previous summer records of swans and by data from extensive aerial surveys. The population is estimated to number about 50 pairs, with at least 32 pairs found near Toobally Lakes in southeast Yukon Territory. Habitat, nesting, population, and migration data are presented for the Toobally Lskn population. The habitat is characterized by rolling hills interspersed with water bodies from 5 ha to 250 ha in area, frequently influenced by beaver. Nesting and cygnet development appeared to be later than those reported for Alaska or Alberta. Cygnet production was 19 young by August 1980 and 26 young by July 1981. Band returns indicate that part of the Yukon population winters in Montana. Recommendations for habitat proteaion are made.ViewShow abstractPermafrost distribution in the Southern Part of the discontinuous permafrost zone in Quebec and LabradorArticleJan 1979 Roger J. E. BrownThe distribution of permafrost in the southern part of the discontinuous zone in Quebec and Labrador is described. At the southern limit of this subzone islands of permafrost vary in extent from a few tens of square metres to several hectares and in thickness from a few centimetres to a metre or so. Northward to the middle of the discontinuous zone permafrost becomes increasingly widespread reaching a thickness exceeding 100 metres. Permafrost occurs mainly in peatlands, on some north facing slopes and above treeline on mountain summits. The relationships of permafrost distribution to climatic and terrain factors, including air temperature, vegetation, drainage and snow cover are discussed, the last being particularly important. The paper concludes with an analysis of some prominent air photo patterns. La r\u00e9partition du perg\u00e9lisol dans la partie m\u00e9ridionale de la zone discontinue du Qu\u00e9bec-Labrador est d\u00e9crit. Au sud de la zone de perg\u00e9lisol discontinu, la superficie des \u00eelots de perg\u00e9lisol varie entre quelques dizaines de m\u00e8tres carr\u00e9s et plusieurs hectares et l'\u00e9paisseur du perg\u00e9lisol se situe entre quelques centim\u00e8tres et environ un m\u00e8tre. En se dirigeant vers le nord, jusqu'au centre de la zone discontinue, le perg\u00e9lisol devient plus dense et son \u00e9paisseur d\u00e9passe la centaine de m\u00e8tres. Le perg\u00e9lisol se manifeste surtout dans les tourbi\u00e8res, sur les versants expos\u00e9s au nord et sur les sommets au-dessus de la limite arbor\u00e9enne. Il est ensuite question des relations entre la r\u00e9partition du perg\u00e9lisol et les caract\u00e9ristiques du climat et du terrain telles la temp\u00e9rature de l'air, la v\u00e9g\u00e9tation, les conditions de drainage et l'\u00e9paisseur de la neige, ce dernier aspect \u00e9tant particuli\u00e8rement important. L'\u00e9tude se termine par une analyse des traits saillants de quelques photos a\u00e9riennes. RESViewShow abstractThe ArcticArticleOct 1968Q J Roy Meteorol Soc F. Kenneth HareViewClimate and the limits of permafrost: A zonal analysisArticleMar 2002 Daniel Riseborough M. W. SmithThis paper defines the climatic and environmental conditions that determine the limits and continuity of permafrost occurrence, in the Canadian context. The analysis utilizes a functional model that links air, surface and permafrost temperature through seasonal surface transfer functions and subsurface thermal properties. The temperature of permafrost (TTOP) results from the interplay between the air temperature, the nival (snow) offset and the thermal offset. These offset values vary systematically and geographically with freezing and thawing indices, snow cover conditions and ground thermal properties. These effects are analysed by calculating offset and TTOP values using Canadian climate station data for air temperature and snowfall. Whilst permafrost is ultimately a climatic phenomenon, the ground thermal conductivity ratio, via the thermal offset, is shown to be the critical factor in determining the southernmost extent of (discontinuous) permafrost. In contrast, snow cover, via the nival offset, is the critical factor in determining the northern limit of discontinuous permafrost (i.e. southern limit of continuous permafrost). Calculated TTOP values increase gradually southwards towards the limit of permafrost occurrence, as the effect of a rising mean annual air temperature (MAAT) is counteracted by an increasing thermal offset. This results in a diffuse geographical transition in the disappearance of permafrost. In contrast, there is a more abrupt transition to continuous permafrost at the northern limit of the discontinuous zone, associated with geographical changes in snow cover and the associated nival offset. The transition from discontinuous to continuous permafrost occurs between a MAAT of \u22126\u00b0 to \u22128\u00b0C. This may explain the air temperature limit for continuous permafrost cited by previous authors. Copyright \u00a9 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.ViewShow abstractPermafrost thermal amelioration tests near Schefferville, QuebecArticleFeb 2011Can J Earth Sci Frank H. NicholsonPermafrost thermal amelioration techniques have been tested for 4 years near Schefferville (mean annual temperature \u22126 \u00b0C). The most important amelioration measure tested was the use of snow fences to increase snow depth and hence reduce winter heat losses, which affect the permafrost much more than changing the summer heat input conditions. However, when different summer treatments were tested, stripping the vegetation, darkening the ground and using thin transparent covers proved beneficial. Monitoring included deep ground temperature measurements (to 25 m), radiation instruments, lysimeters, and measurement of ground thermal properties. At 5 m depth, between 20 and 40 \u00d7 106 Jm\u22122 are gained and lost each year under natural conditions, whereas the amelioration gave a continuous gain of 20 \u00d7 106 Jm\u22122 per annum (nearly 2% of net radiation), increasing mean temperature by 2.5 \u00b0over 4 years. At the 10 m depth corresponding gains were 10 \u00d7 106 Jm\u22122 and 1.5\u00b0. The rocks (iron-rich) have high thermal conductivities, and slower amelioration results are likely in other areas. Limited plot size (7500 m2) has resulted in significant lateral heat loss. The overall test result is that the active layer has been greatly deepened but no thaw has yet been held through a full winter. The method would be useful in several mining applications, including the prevention of new permafrost.ViewShow abstractPermafrost Distribution in Peatlands of West-Central Canada During the Holocene Warm Period 6000 Years BPArticleJan 1995 Stephen C. ZoltaiThe extent and distribution of permafrost in peatlands 6000 years ago was investigated in the present discontinuous and continuous permafrost zones of west-central Canada. Permafrost peatlands were cored at 161 locations and the floristic composition of the peat was determined from macrofossil analysis. The reconstructed paleoenvironments were used to indicate the presence or absence of permafrost at the time of peat formation. Chronological control was provided by radiocarbon dating of substantial changes in the peat sequences and by dates of basal peat deposits. Peatland formation began after glacial ice disappeared from the land surface of west-central Canada. Macrofossils indicate that most peatlands were fens without permafrost at 6 ka, except in the far north. Permafrost was already present in many areas of the Arctic, and peat accumulation occurred under permafrost conditions. In the southern area, permafrost development in peatlands began about 4 ka as the middle Holocene warm period came to a close. Permafrost development in the fens was associated with the development of a Sphagnum-dominated surface on the fens, caused by the onset of a cooler and moister climate. The insulation provided by the surface peat layer and by the associated tree cover initiated permafrost development in small lenses that coalesced into large permafrost bodies according to the prevailing climatic conditions. At the target date, 6 ka, permafrost was present in some peatlands, but the distribution zones shifted 300 to 500 km to the north, relative to the present zonation. It is estimated that this corresponds to a mean annual temperature that was about 5\u00b0C warmer than at present.ViewShow abstractModeling of Water-rock interaction in the Mackenzie Basin: competition between sulfuric and carbonic acidsArticleOct 2011CHEM GEOL E. Beaulieu David Labat J\u00e9r\u00f4me Gaillardet Yves GodderisThe chemical weathering of continental surfaces depends on many factors including lithology, climate, tectonics, erosion, soil or vegetation, and also on the availability of acidity in the weathering zone. In addition to atmospheric/soil CO2, sulfide oxidation may represent a significant source of protons for weathering reactions as shown previously for the rivers draining the Mackenzie Basin, Canada. Here, a numerical model describing continental weathering reactions based on laboratory kinetic laws is coupled to a dynamic global vegetation model (the B-WITCH model) in order to estimate the impact of sulfide oxidation on chemical weathering and associated atmospheric CO2 consumption fluxes throughout the Mackenzie River basin. The model is first calibrated with available field data for the various sub-basin of the Mackenzie watershed and then, a simulation is performed removing the contribution of sulfuric acid to the weathering system. The main outcomes of the present study are that 1) the dissolved silica export is controlled by secondary minerals reactivity in soils and the calcium and magnesium fluxes are driven by the dissolution of calcite and dolomite, 2) the atmospheric CO2 consumption by weathering processes in the Mackenzie river is limited, accounting for only 24% of the total bicarbonate flux to the ocean, confirming a previous study and suggesting that weathering processes in the Mackenzie watershed act as a source of carbon to the atmosphere at the geological timescale, and 3) the presence of sulfide minerals within a river basin decreases the apparent net consumption of atmospheric CO2 through chemical weathering. We show that the actual production of sulfuric acid in the weathering zone of the Mackenzie basin reduces the net atmospheric CO2 consumption by about two, compared to what the atmospheric CO2 consumption should be in the absence of sulfide minerals. Sulfuric-acid-driven chemical weathering has thus to be considered at both short and long timescales when looking at the link between chemical weathering and the global carbon cycle.ViewShow abstractMulti-criteria evaluation and least cost path analysis for an arctic all-weather roadArticleOct 2005APPL GEOGR Douglas Dudycha Stephen Traynor David M. Atkinson Peter DeadmanIncreasing interest in the development of the base metal, gold, and diamond resources in the Slave Geological Province in Nunavut has led to the proposal that a deep-water port be constructed in Bathurst Inlet and connected to these mining regions by an all-weather road. In response to previous concerns regarding the subjectivity of existing techniques for route determination, this paper outlines a methodology for determining a least-cost-path for the route of an all-weather road that incorporates multi-criteria analysis. This methodology allows for the objective comparison of alternate scenarios for weighting the factors that determine the location of a road's route. The methodology is applied, using three alternate scenarios for road construction that are compared so as to determine the effectiveness and sensitivity of this approach. The strengths and limitations of this methodology are discussed.ViewShow abstractLe perg\u00e9lisol au Qu\u00e9bec nordique : bilan et perspectivesArticleJan 1987 Michel Allard Maurice K. SeguinLa compilation de travaux publies et d'etudes inedites permet de proposer un bilan des connaissances sur le pergelisol du Quebec. Au Quebec arctique, quelques etudes, fondees sur des mesures thermiques dans des trous de forage, ont revele des epaisseurs de plusieurs centaines de metres de pergelisol et permis d'en reconstituer l'evolution climatique. Cependant, la morphologie cryogene n'a presque pas ete etudiee. Au Quebec subarctique, les nombreuses mesures thermiques dans la region de Schefferville et les releves regionaux, principalement en Hudsonie. mettent en evidence l'etroite relation entre la presence, l'epaisseur et le regime thermique du pergelisol et les facteurs climatiques locaux, en particulier l'enneigement. Ce dernier facteur etant lie de pres a la structure du couvert vegetal, une nouvelle carte du pergelisol, fondee sur les donnees les plus recentes de la vegetation et des observations personnelles, est proposee. Trois approches ont servi a determiner l'\u00e2ge et l'evolution passee du pergelisol : 1) un modele physico-mathematique developpe a partir de mesures thermiques en milieu arctique; 2) l'analyse stratigraphique de tourbieres a palses; 3) l'analyse du contexte geologique quaternaire. La dynamique recente du pergelisol a ete etudiee par le biais des changements ecologiques survenus dans les tourbieres. Le pergelisol au Quebec subarctique peut dater d'aussi loin que la deglaciation dans les regions jamais boisees; ailleurs, il apparait etre d'\u00e2ge neoglaciaire. Les feux de forets ont peut-etre eu une influence sur sa dynamique. Les formes cryogenes et les gelisols les plus repandus au Quebec subarctique sont brievement mis en relation avec les differents types de formations superficielles pergelisolees. Les mesures in situ des proprietes physiques et du regime thermique du pergelisol discontinu seront necessaires pour prevoir l'effet des changements climatiques.ViewShow abstractClimatic change and permafrost stability in the Estern Canadian Cordillera.Conference PaperFull-text availableJan 2008 Stuart Arthur HarrisViewWhere on Earth is Permafrost? Boundaries and TransitionsChapterJan 2002 Dan W. Riseborough Michael W. SmithGeomorphology has two interlocking paradigms; the first is a process paradigm where there is a hierarchy of knowledge through the physics of a medium, the mechanics of process, to the landscape form; the second is a temporal paradigm from the history of the landscape, to the present condition, and with a prediction capacity. These are central to concepts of landscape transitions and landform assemblages. The paper explores landscape transitions occurring in proglacial and paraglacial environments based on the horizontal link of sediment transfer rather than on the traditional vertical division into glaciology, hydrology and periglacial geomorphology. In glacierized mountain areas the superimposition of transitions at different scales can readily be demonstrated within the regional landscape. Transitions may occur slowly, rapidly or instantaneously but their frequency of change will vary depending on the underlying cause of the transition. The concept of landform assemblages should integrate the ideas of process activity at different spatial, quantitative and temporal scales. Landform assemblages are therefore infmitely variable. The ways in which the concepts of transition and landform assemblages influence geomorphological interpretation is illustrated by reference to the glacierized environments of the southwest Yukon.ViewShow abstractGu\u00eda Terminol\u00f3gica de la Geocriolog\u00eda SudamericanaBookJan 2014 Dario Trombotto Pablo A. Wainstein Lukas U. ArensonViewPlateau Mountain: A Case Study of alpine permafrost in the Canadian Rocky MountainsArticleFull-text availableJan 1978 Stuart Arthur Harris R. J. E. BrownInvestigations of alpine permafrost in the Western Cordillera of Canada were initiated in 1974 on Plateau Mountain located in the front ranges of the Rocky Mountains 80 km southwest of Calgary, Alberta. Thermocouple and thermistor cables to measure ground temperatures were installed in boreholes to depths of 15 to 30 m on the summit above treeline at 2519 m elevation and down the forested mountain side to 2103 m elevation. Monthly observations on these cables and temperature checks in an ice cave confirm the existence of permafrost (-1.0 to -1.5 degrees C). The mean annual air temperature at the summit is -4.1 degrees C and strong winds remove most of the snow. Temperature measurements indicate that permafrost extends to a depth of possibly 100 m or more, the upper portion having adjusted to the present climate and the lower layers being relic. On a entrepris en 1974 une \u00e9tude du perg\u00e9lisol alpin de la cordill\u00e8re Occidentale canadienne, sur le mont Plateau, qui fait partie des cha\u00eenons frontaux des montagnes Rocheuses \u00e0 80 km au sud-ouest de Calgary, en Alberta. On a install\u00e9 des c\u00e2bles de thermocouples et thermistors destin\u00e9s \u00e0 mesurer la temp\u00e9rature du sol dans des trous de sondage de 15 \u00e0 30 m de profondeur for\u00e9s \u00e0 2159 m d'altitude, au sommet, lequel d\u00e9passe la limite sup\u00e9rieure des arbes, et sur le versant bois\u00e9 de la montagne jusqu'\u00e0 2103 m d'altitude. Des observations effectu\u00e9es chaque mois sur ces c\u00e2bles, ainsi que les relev\u00e9s de temp\u00e9rature obtenus dans une caverne de glace confirment l'existence du perg\u00e9lisol (-1. 0 \u00e0 -1.5 degr\u00e9s C). La temp\u00e9rature atmosph\u00e9rique annuelle moyenne est de -4.1 degr\u00e9s C au sommet, et des vents violents enl\u00e8vent la plus grande partie de la neige. Des mesures de temp\u00e9rature indiquent que le perg\u00e9lisol atteint au moins 100 m de profondeur, et que la portion sup\u00e9rieure de celui-ci subit l'influence du climat actuel, tandis que les couches inf\u00e9rieures sont des couches relictes. RESViewShow abstractThis research doesn't cite any other publications.AdJoin ResearchGate to find the people and research you need to help your work.15+ million members118+ million publications700k+ research projectsJoin for freeRecommended publicationsDiscover more publications, questions and projects in PermafrostConference PaperFull-text availableMassive Ice and Ice-Rich Soil Detection by Gravimetric Surveying at Dry Creek, Southwestern Yukon Te...July 2015 Benoit Loranger Chantal Lemieux Daniel Fortier Guy Dor\u00e9Gravity measurements were made using a Scintrex CG-5 Autograv gravimeter in permafrost terrain conditions where bodies of buried ice were expected. The main objective was to assess the feasibility of using gravimetric technology to detect massive ice bodies at Dry Creek, Yukon Territory, Canada. Tests at 11 gravimetric survey lines and 10 boreholes were performed during the summers of 2013 and ... [Show full abstract] 2014. Residual anomaly profiles provide a quick first estimate of the amount of ice in underlying soil strata. A mean anomaly of-0.10 mGal was found near a thermokarst, south of the Dry Creek rest area along the Alaska Highway. The cryostratigraphy comprises at depth an ice-rich diamicton covered by massive ice with suspended silty inclusions and an overlying layer of glacio-fluvial gravel. At the base of a small glacio-fluvial hill deposit, on the southeast side of the road, a mean anomaly of-0.260 mGal was found. A massive ice body of 9.3 m of maximum thickness was drilled through. Since drilling is planned after gravimetric surveys, it is possible to assess whether or not this technique is effective for detecting sub-surface ice features. This paper presents an overview of the site, the gravimetric detection technique employed, and gravimetric and borehole test results and analysis.View full-textArticlePermafrost aspects of Hudson Bay RailroadJanuary 1959J. L. CharlesA general description of the factors conducive to causing the condition of permafrost, the possible extent of this condition in Northern Canada and its effect on construction and maintenance. Also, recommended practices to contend with problems permafrost presents in connection with such projects, in particular, the Hudson Bay Railroad. Ce m\u00e9moire donne un apercu des facteurs propices \u00e0 la ... [Show full abstract] formation du perg\u00e9lisol, l'\u00e9tendue probable de la zone de perg\u00e9lisol dans le nord du Canada, ainsi que ses effets sur la construction et l'entretien des b\u00e2timents. Il indique \u00e9 galement les pratiques recommand\u00e9es pour r\u00e9soudre les probl\u00e8 mes pos\u00e9s par le perg\u00e9lisol dans la r\u00e9alisation de ces projets, en particulier celui du Chemin de fer de la Baie d' Hudson. RESRead moreArticleThe Variation of Physical Properties in Frozen Soils at Various Freezing TemperaturesJune 2014Wanjei ChoS.-S. HongKiju Kim Youngseok KimDue to the recent climate change, the colder and longer winter is expected in Korea. Besides, the recent participation agreement on the development of the natural gas pipeline in Russia and construction of the second Korean Antarctic research station, the Jangbogo station changes the research interests from the seasonally frozen ground to the permafrost ground. The recent development of the site ... [Show full abstract] investigation techniques using wave propagation and electrical resistivity enabled engineers to evaluate the physical properties of the frozen soils and further correlate them to the mechanical properties. However, the physical properties of the frozen ground change when the water in the soil solidifies to ice; this change is particularly notable between 0 and -10\u00b0C. Therefore, the physical property changes due to freezing needs to be investigated in terms of wave propagation characteristics and electrical resistivity with regard to the various freezing temperatures. In this study, the characteristics of wave propagation and electrical resistivity of frozen soils are investigated under various sub-zero temperatures. The characteristics of wave propagations are analyzed in terms of compression and shear wave velocities. The electrical resistivity is measured under various sub-zero temperatures to understand the effects of ice, which will further provide the valuable information about the location of the active layer. Furthermore, the evaluated physical properties can be used as basic data for the evaluation of the mechanical properties such as strength and stiffness.Read moreArticleOn the influence of geological and cryospheric factors on slope instabilities in steep high-mountain... Florian AmannRoss S Purves Luzia FischerChristian HuggelSlope stability of steep flanks in glacierised and permafrost-affected high-alpine regions is controlled by different factors, such as topography, geological-geotechnical conditions, hydrogeology, glaciation and permafrost. Changes in one or more factors may affect slope stability and eventually lead to rock fall events. Currently, cryospheric factors are most prone to changes. Based on the ... [Show full abstract] analysis of recent rock fall events, this study aims to provide new aspects for the understanding of the different factors and mechanisms which may affect the stability of high-mountain rock walls, especially in view of ongoing climatic change. The complexity of slope stability problems underlying high-mountain boundary conditions demands the implementation of multidisciplinary investigations and modelling methods. We report on an integrated assessment of the detachment zones of several recent rock fall events. Detailed site investigations were combined with comprehensive statistical analyses of rock fall events. As a case study the Tschierva rock fall event was back-calculated by means of the discrete element method (UDEC). Different parameters of the detachment zone such as the topography, lithological, geomechanical and hydrology characteristics, as well as glaciation and permafrost occurrence were investigated based on scientific field data and from imagery or meteorological data. Results from the slope stability modelling show that the glacier retreat strongly influences the stress field and causes an opening of pre-existing discontinuities in the bedrock. A second case study was performed for the Monte Rosa east face. Besides highly specified field and imagery investigations, high-resolution DTMs from LiDAR and digital photogrammetry were developed for detailed investigations of long-term topographic changes in glaciation and bedrock within the past 50 years. The results revealed the significant influence of glacier retreat on slope stability and important feedback processes. Complementary to the findings of these two case studies, a larger number of recent high-mountain rock fall events in the European Alps were analysed. A number of different data sets and investigation techniques such as DTM and imagery analyses, geological maps, on-site field investigations, permafrost modelling as well as numerical stability modelling techniques were considered and evaluated statistically. Based on this multidisciplinary approach, the influence of the different factors and processes on slope failure was assessed. The characteristics of investigated detachment zones can be compared qualitatively and statistically and allow first integral conclusions about the effect and importance of the different investigated parameters on slope instabilities.Read moreDiscover moreDownload citationWhat type of file do you want? RIS BibTeX Plain TextWhat do you want to download? Citation only Citation and abstractDownloadLooking for the full-text?You can request the full-text of this article directly from the authors on ResearchGate.Request full-textAlready a member? Log inorDiscover by subject areaRecruit researchersJoin for freeLoginEmail Tip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inor log in withWelcome back! Please log in.Email \u00b7 HintTip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inor log in withNo account? Sign upAboutNewsCompanyCareersSupportHelp centerFAQBusiness solutionsRecruitingAdvertisingAd\u00a9 ResearchGate 2019. All rights reserved.ImprintTermsPrivacy", "Le perge\u0301lisol dans les terrains se\u0301dimentaires a\u0300 forte de\u0301clivite\u0301: distribution, re\u0301gime thermique et instabilite\u0301s. (Book) [WorldCat.org] Your Web browser is not enabled for JavaScript. Some features of WorldCat will not be available. Home WorldCat Home About WorldCat Help Search Search for Library Items Search for Lists Search for Contacts Search for a Library Create lists, bibliographies and reviews: or Search WorldCat Find items in libraries near you Advanced Search Find a Library Your list has reached the maximum number of items. Please create a new list with a new name; move some items to a new or existing list; or delete some items. Your request to send this item has been completed. Cite/Export Cite/Export Copy a citation APA (6th ed.) Chicago (Author-Date, 15th ed.) Harvard (18th ed.) MLA (7th ed.) Turabian (6th ed.) Export a citation Export to RefWorks Export to EndNote / Reference Manager Export to EasyBib Export to EndNote / Reference Manager(non-Latin) Cancel Note: Citations are based on reference standards. However, formatting rules can vary widely between applications and fields of interest or study. The specific requirements or preferences of your reviewing publisher, classroom teacher, institution or organization should be applied. Print E-mail E-mail All fields are required. The E-mail Address(es) field is required. Please enter recipient e-mail address(es). The E-mail Address(es) you entered is(are) not in a valid format. Please re-enter recipient e-mail address(es). You may send this item to up to five recipients. Enter recipient e-mail address(es): Separate up to five addresses with commas (,) The name field is required. Please enter your name. Enter your name: The subject field is required. Please enter the subject. Subject: The E-mail message field is required. Please enter the message. E-mail Message: I thought you might be interested in this item at http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/631959592 Title: Le perge\u0301lisol dans les terrains se\u0301dimentaires a\u0300 forte de\u0301clivite\u0301: distribution, re\u0301gime thermique et instabilite\u0301s. Publisher: OCLC:631959592 Please verify that you are not a robot. Cancel Share Permalink Permalink Copy this URL to link to this page: Add a review Would you also like to submit a review for this item? Cancel Your list has reached the maximum number of items. Please create a new list with a new name; move some items to a new or existing list; or delete some items. You already recently rated this item. Your rating has been recorded Write a review Rate this item: 1 2 3 4 5 Preview this item Preview this item Checking... Le perge\u0301lisol dans les terrains se\u0301dimentaires a\u0300 forte de\u0301clivite\u0301: distribution, re\u0301gime thermique et instabilite\u0301s. Author: Lambiel, Christophe Dissertation: Thesis / Dissertation ETD. Edition/Format: Thesis/dissertation : Thesis/dissertation : eBook : French Summary: Dans le contexte d'un climat de plus en plus chaud, la localisation du perge\u0301lisol dans les terrains se\u0301dimentaires a\u0300 forte de\u0301clivite\u0301 et l'e\u0301valuation des mouvements de terrain qui y ont cours s'ave\u0300rent primordiales. S'inse\u0301rant dans cette proble\u0301matique, ce travail de the\u0300se s'articule autour de deux axes de recherche diffe\u0301rents. D'un point de vue statique, cette recherche propose une e\u0301tude de la distribution et des caracte\u0301ristiques du perge\u0301lisol dans les e\u0301boulis de la zone pe\u0301riglaciaire alpine. D'un point de vue dynamique, une analyse de l'influence des caracte\u0301ristiques du perge\u0301lisol (teneur en glace, tempe\u0301rature du perge\u0301lisol, etc.) et des variations des tempe\u0301ratures de l'air et du sol sur les vitesses de fluage des corps se\u0301dimentaires gele\u0301s est effectue\u0301e. Afin de re\u0301pondre a\u0300 ce double objectif, l'approche \"terrain\" a e\u0301te\u0301 privile\u0301gie\u0301e. Pour de\u0301terminer la re\u0301partition et les caracte\u0301ristiques du perge\u0301lisol, les me\u0301thodes traditionnelles de prospection du perge\u0301lisol ont e\u0301te\u0301 utilise\u0301es, a\u0300 savoir la mesure de la tempe\u0301rature du sol a\u0300 la base du manteau neigeux (BTS), la mesure de la tempe\u0301rature du sol en continu ainsi que la me\u0301thode ge\u0301oe\u0301lectrique. Les mouvements de terrain ont pour leur part e\u0301te\u0301 mesure\u0301s a\u0300 l'aide d'un GPS diffe\u0301rentiel. L'e\u0301tude de la distribution du perge\u0301lisol a e\u0301te\u0301 effectue\u0301e dans une quinzaine d'e\u0301boulis situe\u0301s dans les re\u0301gions du Mont Gele\u0301 (Verbier-Nendaz) et d'Arolla principalement. Dans la plupart des cas, un perge\u0301lisol a pu e\u0302tre mis en e\u0301vidence dans la partie infe\u0301rieure des accumulations se\u0301dimentaires, alors que la partie me\u0301diane des e\u0301boulis n'est, le plus souvent, pas gele\u0301e. Si cette absence de perge\u0301lisol se prolonge parfois dans les portions sommitales des pentes, les mesures re\u0301alise\u0301es montrent que dans d'autres cas des se\u0301diments gele\u0301s y sont a\u0300 nouveau pre\u0301sents. Les re\u0301sistivite\u0301s e\u0301lectriques mesure\u0301es dans les portions gele\u0301es des e\u0301boulis e\u0301tudie\u0301s sont dans la plupart des cas nettement infe\u0301rieures a\u0300 celles mesure\u0301es sur les glaciers rocheux. Des e\u0301tudes pre\u0301alables.In the context of a warmer climate, the localisation of permafrost in steep sedimentary terrain and the measurement of terrain movements that occur in these areas is of great importance. With respect to these problems, this PhD thesis follows two different research axes. From a static point of view, the research presents a study of the permafrost distribution and characteristics in the talus slopes of the alpine periglacial belt. From a dynamic point of view, an analysis of the influence of the permafrost characteristics (ice content, permafrost temperature, etc.) and air and soil temperature variations on the creep velocities of frozen sedimentary bodies is carried out. In order to attain this double objective, the \"field\" approach was favoured. To determine the distribution and the characteristics of permafrost, the traditional methods of permafrost prospecting were used, i.e. ground surface temperature measurements at the base of the snow cover (BTS), year-round ground temperature measurements and DC-resistivity prospecting. The terrain movements were measured using a differential GPS. The permafrost distribution study was carried out on 15 talus slopes located mainly in the Mont Gele\u0301 (Verbier-Nendaz) and Arolla areas (Swiss Alps). In most cases, permafrost was found in the lower part of the talus slope, whereas the medium part was free of ice. In some cases, the upper part of the talus is also free of permafrost, whereas in other cases permafrost is present. Electrical resistivities measured in the frozen parts of the studied talus are in most cases clearly lower than those measured on rock glaciers. Former studies have shown that internal air circulation is responsible for the negative thermal anomaly and, when it exists, the permafrost present in the lower part of talus slopes located more than 1000 m below the regional lower limit of discontinuous permafrost. The study of four low-altitude talus slopes (1400-1900 m), and notably the equipment of Dreveneuse fi. Read more... Rating: (not yet rated) 0 with reviews - Be the first. Find a copy online Links to this item Item Resolution URL Add library to Favorites Please choose whether or not you want other users to be able to see on your profile that this library is a favorite of yours. Allow this favorite library to be seen by others Keep this favorite library private Save Cancel Find a copy in the library Finding libraries that hold this item... Details Material Type: Thesis/dissertation, Internet resource Document Type: Internet Resource All Authors / Contributors: Lambiel, Christophe OCLC Number: 631959592 Language Note: French. Abstract: Dans le contexte d'un climat de plus en plus chaud, la localisation du perge\u0301lisol dans les terrains se\u0301dimentaires a\u0300 forte de\u0301clivite\u0301 et l'e\u0301valuation des mouvements de terrain qui y ont cours s'ave\u0300rent primordiales. S'inse\u0301rant dans cette proble\u0301matique, ce travail de the\u0300se s'articule autour de deux axes de recherche diffe\u0301rents. D'un point de vue statique, cette recherche propose une e\u0301tude de la distribution et des caracte\u0301ristiques du perge\u0301lisol dans les e\u0301boulis de la zone pe\u0301riglaciaire alpine. D'un point de vue dynamique, une analyse de l'influence des caracte\u0301ristiques du perge\u0301lisol (teneur en glace, tempe\u0301rature du perge\u0301lisol, etc.) et des variations des tempe\u0301ratures de l'air et du sol sur les vitesses de fluage des corps se\u0301dimentaires gele\u0301s est effectue\u0301e. Afin de re\u0301pondre a\u0300 ce double objectif, l'approche \"terrain\" a e\u0301te\u0301 privile\u0301gie\u0301e. Pour de\u0301terminer la re\u0301partition et les caracte\u0301ristiques du perge\u0301lisol, les me\u0301thodes traditionnelles de prospection du perge\u0301lisol ont e\u0301te\u0301 utilise\u0301es, a\u0300 savoir la mesure de la tempe\u0301rature du sol a\u0300 la base du manteau neigeux (BTS), la mesure de la tempe\u0301rature du sol en continu ainsi que la me\u0301thode ge\u0301oe\u0301lectrique. Les mouvements de terrain ont pour leur part e\u0301te\u0301 mesure\u0301s a\u0300 l'aide d'un GPS diffe\u0301rentiel. L'e\u0301tude de la distribution du perge\u0301lisol a e\u0301te\u0301 effectue\u0301e dans une quinzaine d'e\u0301boulis situe\u0301s dans les re\u0301gions du Mont Gele\u0301 (Verbier-Nendaz) et d'Arolla principalement. Dans la plupart des cas, un perge\u0301lisol a pu e\u0302tre mis en e\u0301vidence dans la partie infe\u0301rieure des accumulations se\u0301dimentaires, alors que la partie me\u0301diane des e\u0301boulis n'est, le plus souvent, pas gele\u0301e. Si cette absence de perge\u0301lisol se prolonge parfois dans les portions sommitales des pentes, les mesures re\u0301alise\u0301es montrent que dans d'autres cas des se\u0301diments gele\u0301s y sont a\u0300 nouveau pre\u0301sents. Les re\u0301sistivite\u0301s e\u0301lectriques mesure\u0301es dans les portions gele\u0301es des e\u0301boulis e\u0301tudie\u0301s sont dans la plupart des cas nettement infe\u0301rieures a\u0300 celles mesure\u0301es sur les glaciers rocheux. Des e\u0301tudes pre\u0301alables.In the context of a warmer climate, the localisation of permafrost in steep sedimentary terrain and the measurement of terrain movements that occur in these areas is of great importance. With respect to these problems, this PhD thesis follows two different research axes. From a static point of view, the research presents a study of the permafrost distribution and characteristics in the talus slopes of the alpine periglacial belt. From a dynamic point of view, an analysis of the influence of the permafrost characteristics (ice content, permafrost temperature, etc.) and air and soil temperature variations on the creep velocities of frozen sedimentary bodies is carried out. In order to attain this double objective, the \"field\" approach was favoured. To determine the distribution and the characteristics of permafrost, the traditional methods of permafrost prospecting were used, i.e. ground surface temperature measurements at the base of the snow cover (BTS), year-round ground temperature measurements and DC-resistivity prospecting. The terrain movements were measured using a differential GPS. The permafrost distribution study was carried out on 15 talus slopes located mainly in the Mont Gele\u0301 (Verbier-Nendaz) and Arolla areas (Swiss Alps). In most cases, permafrost was found in the lower part of the talus slope, whereas the medium part was free of ice. In some cases, the upper part of the talus is also free of permafrost, whereas in other cases permafrost is present. Electrical resistivities measured in the frozen parts of the studied talus are in most cases clearly lower than those measured on rock glaciers. Former studies have shown that internal air circulation is responsible for the negative thermal anomaly and, when it exists, the permafrost present in the lower part of talus slopes located more than 1000 m below the regional lower limit of discontinuous permafrost. The study of four low-altitude talus slopes (1400-1900 m), and notably the equipment of Dreveneuse fi. Reviews User-contributed reviews Add a review and share your thoughts with other readers. Be the first. Add a review and share your thoughts with other readers. Be the first. Tags Add tags\u00a0for\u00a0\"Le perge\u0301lisol dans les terrains se\u0301dimentaires a\u0300 forte de\u0301clivite\u0301: distribution, re\u0301gime thermique et instabilite\u0301s.\". Be the first. Confirm this request You may have already requested this item. Please select Ok if you would like to proceed with this request anyway. Linked Data More info about Linked Data Primary Entity <http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/631959592> # Le perg\u00e9lisol dans les terrains s\u00e9dimentaires \u00e0 forte d\u00e9clivit\u00e9: distribution, r\u00e9gime thermique et instabilit\u00e9s. a schema:CreativeWork, pto:Web_document, bgn:Thesis, schema:Book ; bgn:inSupportOf \"Thesis / Dissertation ETD.\" ; library:oclcnum \"631959592\" ; schema:contributor <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/1812482712#Agent/lambiel_christophe> ; # Lambiel, Christophe schema:description \"Dans le contexte d'un climat de plus en plus chaud, la localisation du perg\u00e9lisol dans les terrains s\u00e9dimentaires \u00e0 forte d\u00e9clivit\u00e9 et l'\u00e9valuation des mouvements de terrain qui y ont cours s'av\u00e8rent primordiales. S'ins\u00e9rant dans cette probl\u00e9matique, ce travail de th\u00e8se s'articule autour de deux axes de recherche diff\u00e9rents. D'un point de vue statique, cette recherche propose une \u00e9tude de la distribution et des caract\u00e9ristiques du perg\u00e9lisol dans les \u00e9boulis de la zone p\u00e9riglaciaire alpine. D'un point de vue dynamique, une analyse de l'influence des caract\u00e9ristiques du perg\u00e9lisol (teneur en glace, temp\u00e9rature du perg\u00e9lisol, etc.) et des variations des temp\u00e9ratures de l'air et du sol sur les vitesses de fluage des corps s\u00e9dimentaires gel\u00e9s est effectu\u00e9e. Afin de r\u00e9pondre \u00e0 ce double objectif, l'approche \"terrain\" a \u00e9t\u00e9 privil\u00e9gi\u00e9e. Pour d\u00e9terminer la r\u00e9partition et les caract\u00e9ristiques du perg\u00e9lisol, les m\u00e9thodes traditionnelles de prospection du perg\u00e9lisol ont \u00e9t\u00e9 utilis\u00e9es, \u00e0 savoir la mesure de la temp\u00e9rature du sol \u00e0 la base du manteau neigeux (BTS), la mesure de la temp\u00e9rature du sol en continu ainsi que la m\u00e9thode g\u00e9o\u00e9lectrique. Les mouvements de terrain ont pour leur part \u00e9t\u00e9 mesur\u00e9s \u00e0 l'aide d'un GPS diff\u00e9rentiel. L'\u00e9tude de la distribution du perg\u00e9lisol a \u00e9t\u00e9 effectu\u00e9e dans une quinzaine d'\u00e9boulis situ\u00e9s dans les r\u00e9gions du Mont Gel\u00e9 (Verbier-Nendaz) et d'Arolla principalement. Dans la plupart des cas, un perg\u00e9lisol a pu \u00eatre mis en \u00e9vidence dans la partie inf\u00e9rieure des accumulations s\u00e9dimentaires, alors que la partie m\u00e9diane des \u00e9boulis n'est, le plus souvent, pas gel\u00e9e. Si cette absence de perg\u00e9lisol se prolonge parfois dans les portions sommitales des pentes, les mesures r\u00e9alis\u00e9es montrent que dans d'autres cas des s\u00e9diments gel\u00e9s y sont \u00e0 nouveau pr\u00e9sents. Les r\u00e9sistivit\u00e9s \u00e9lectriques mesur\u00e9es dans les portions gel\u00e9es des \u00e9boulis \u00e9tudi\u00e9s sont dans la plupart des cas nettement inf\u00e9rieures \u00e0 celles mesur\u00e9es sur les glaciers rocheux. Des \u00e9tudes pr\u00e9alables.\" ; schema:description \"In the context of a warmer climate, the localisation of permafrost in steep sedimentary terrain and the measurement of terrain movements that occur in these areas is of great importance. With respect to these problems, this PhD thesis follows two different research axes. From a static point of view, the research presents a study of the permafrost distribution and characteristics in the talus slopes of the alpine periglacial belt. From a dynamic point of view, an analysis of the influence of the permafrost characteristics (ice content, permafrost temperature, etc.) and air and soil temperature variations on the creep velocities of frozen sedimentary bodies is carried out. In order to attain this double objective, the \"field\" approach was favoured. To determine the distribution and the characteristics of permafrost, the traditional methods of permafrost prospecting were used, i.e. ground surface temperature measurements at the base of the snow cover (BTS), year-round ground temperature measurements and DC-resistivity prospecting. The terrain movements were measured using a differential GPS. The permafrost distribution study was carried out on 15 talus slopes located mainly in the Mont Gel\u00e9 (Verbier-Nendaz) and Arolla areas (Swiss Alps). In most cases, permafrost was found in the lower part of the talus slope, whereas the medium part was free of ice. In some cases, the upper part of the talus is also free of permafrost, whereas in other cases permafrost is present. Electrical resistivities measured in the frozen parts of the studied talus are in most cases clearly lower than those measured on rock glaciers. Former studies have shown that internal air circulation is responsible for the negative thermal anomaly and, when it exists, the permafrost present in the lower part of talus slopes located more than 1000 m below the regional lower limit of discontinuous permafrost. The study of four low-altitude talus slopes (1400-1900 m), and notably the equipment of Dreveneuse fi.\" ; schema:exampleOfWork <http://worldcat.org/entity/work/id/1812482712> ; schema:inLanguage \"fr\" ; schema:name \"Le perg\u00e9lisol dans les terrains s\u00e9dimentaires \u00e0 forte d\u00e9clivit\u00e9: distribution, r\u00e9gime thermique et instabilit\u00e9s.\" ; schema:productID \"631959592\" ; schema:url <http://doc.rero.ch/record/6234/files/These_LambielC.pdf> ; wdrs:describedby <http://www.worldcat.org/title/-/oclc/631959592> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0. Related Entities <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/1812482712#Agent/lambiel_christophe> # Lambiel, Christophe a bgn:Agent ; schema:name \"Lambiel, Christophe\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0. <http://www.worldcat.org/title/-/oclc/631959592>\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a genont:InformationResource, genont:ContentTypeGenericResource ; schema:about <http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/631959592> ; # Le perg\u00e9lisol dans les terrains s\u00e9dimentaires \u00e0 forte d\u00e9clivit\u00e9: distribution, r\u00e9gime thermique et instabilit\u00e9s. schema:dateModified \"2019-02-09\" ; void:inDataset <http://purl.oclc.org/dataset/WorldCat> ; void:inDataset <http://purl.oclc.org/dataset/WorldCat/DigitalCollectionGateway> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0. Content-negotiable representations Turtle (text/turtle) JSON-LD (application/ld+json) RDF/XML (application/rdf+xml) N-TRIPLES (text/plain) HTML+RDFa (text/html) Languages: \u010cesky \u00a0|\u00a0 Deutsch \u00a0|\u00a0 English \u00a0|\u00a0 Espa\u00f1ol \u00a0|\u00a0 Fran\u00e7ais \u00a0|\u00a0 Italiano \u00a0|\u00a0 Nederlands \u00a0|\u00a0 Portugu\u00eas \u00a0|\u00a0 \u0e20\u0e32\u0e29\u0e32\u0e44\u0e17\u0e22 \u00a0|\u00a0 \ud55c\uad6d\uc5b4 \u00a0|\u00a0 \u65e5\u672c\u8a9e \u00a0|\u00a0 \u4e2d\u6587(\u7e41\u9ad4) \u00a0|\u00a0 \u4e2d\u6587(\u7b80\u4f53) You: Sign In | Register | My WorldCat | My Lists | My Watchlist | My Reviews | My Tags | My Saved Searches WorldCat: Home | About | Help | Search Legal: Copyright \u00a9 2001-2019 OCLC. All rights reserved. | Privacy Policy | Terms and Conditions WorldCat is the world's largest library catalog, helping you find library materials online. Learn more \u203a\u203a Follow WorldCat: Please sign in to WorldCat\u00a0Don't have an account? You can easily\u00a0create a free account. User Name: Password: Remember me on this computer Cancel Forgot your password?", "Permafrost: A review We use cookies to make interactions with our website easy and meaningful, to better understand the use of our services, and to tailor advertising. For further information, including about cookie settings, please read our Cookie Policy . By continuing to use this site, you consent to the use of cookies.Got ittopSee all \u203a33 CitationsDownload citationShare Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Google+ RedditRequest full-textPermafrost: A reviewArticle\u2002in\u2002Geological Society of America Bulletin 65(9)\u00a0\u00b7\u00a0January 1954\u2002with\u200210 ReadsDOI: 10.1130/0016-7606(1954)65[839:PR]2.0.CO;2 Cite this publication ROBERT F. BLACKAbstractPermafrost is estimated to occur in areas totaling about 26 per cent of the land area of the earth. Permafrost is as much as 2000 feet thick in Siberia and 1300 feet thick in Alaska, where its minimum temperature is -12\u00b0C and -10\u00b0C respectively. As it is defined on the basis of temperature, its composition varies over wide limits. Ice is one of the most important components, and large masses commonly are in the form of ice wedges. Structures in ice wedges are generally smaller and more complex than those in glacial ice. Dimensional and optic-axis lineations and foliations of inclusions of air bubbles, organic matter, and clastic material occur in all wedges. Not all structures and orientations of ice crystals in ice wedges can be explained. Permafrost results when the net heat balance of the surface of the earth over a period of several years produces a temperature continuously below 0\u00b0C. Although the general thesis of the problem is relatively simple, it is extremely complex in detail. Complete freezing of bedrock for long periods of time has little geologic aftereffect, except through control of movement of ground water. Freezing of mantle completely eliminates ground-water movement, preserves organic remains indefinitely, reduces or prevents mass movements within the frozen material, and promotes frost action in the overlying active layer. Most emphasis has been given the engineering aspects of permafrost. The volume of literature pertaining directly or indirectly to permafrost is becoming so great that individual competence cannot cover the various fields represented.Do you want to read the rest of this article?Request full-text Citations (33)References (0)... Lambert et al., 2006). Studies of ice properties within ice wedges are a rich source of information in several aspects: facies, texture and fabric studies provide details on genetic processes (Black, 1954Black, , 1978Black, , 1963 Corte, 1962; Shumskii, 1964; Gell, 1976 Gell, , 1978a Samyn et al., 5 2005) while stable water isotopes (\u03b4 18 O and \u03b4D) additionally reveal information about paleotemperatures and paleoenvironmental conditions since ice wedges are built from both the winter snow and the spring meltwater (Meyer et al., 2002a, b; Lauriol et al., 1995; Vasil'chuk and Vasil'chuk, 1998; Vaikm\u00e4eVaikm\u00a8Vaikm\u00e4e, 1989; Dereviagin et al., 2002; Raffi et al., 2004), provided fractionation processes from phase changes are discussed and 10 secondary processes shown to be limited. In this paper, we propose a multi-parameter approach using stable isotope composition , total gas content, gas composition, texture and fabric of two ice wedges from the Laptev Sea coast. ...... Indeed, crystal size is fairly homogeneous throughout the ice wedge and there is no evidence of structural features (folds, shears planes, etc.) 10 that would be generated by seasonal ice-wedge contraction. Finally, the absence of ongoing deformation is further supported by the horizontal c-axes orientations (Black, 1954Black, , 1963Black, , 1976 Corte, 1962; Gell, 1976) and the absence of strain shadow within individual crystals. This suggests that the primary controls on the crystal size in IW-26 are temperature and possibly increased water infiltration, which would be consistent 15 ...Stable isotope and gas properties of two ice wedges from Cape Mamontov Klyk, Laptev Sea, Northern SiberiaArticleFull-text availableDec 2011TCD T. Boereboom Denis Samyn Hanno Meyer Jean-Louis TisonThis paper presents and discusses the texture, fabric and gas properties (contents of total gas, O2, N2, CO2, and CH4) of two ice wedges from Cape Mamontov Klyk, Laptev Sea, Northern Siberia. The two ice wedges display contrasting structures: one being of relatively \"clean\" ice and the other showing clean ice at its centre as well as debris-rich ice on its sides (referred to as ice-sand wedge). A comparison of gas properties, crystal size, fabrics and stable isotope data (\u03b418O and \u03b4D) allows discriminating between three different facies of ice with specific paleoenvironmental signatures, suggesting different climatic conditions and rates of biological activity. More specifically, total gas content and composition reveal variable intensities of meltwater infiltration and show the impact of biological processes with contrasting contributions from anaerobic and aerobic conditions. Stable isotope data are shown to be valid for discussing changes in paleoenvironmental conditions and/or decipher different sources for the snow feeding into the ice wedges with time. Our data also give support to the previous assumption that the composite ice wedge was formed in Pleistocene and the ice wedge in Holocene times. This study sheds more light on the conditions of ice wedge growth under changing environmental conditions.ViewShow abstract... It is not known whether the common ecological variables of soil moisture and nutrient status can select for distinct ecotypes within a single natural community. The wet coastal tundra of northern Alaska provides an excellent opportunity to examine this question, inasmuch as microtopography associated with ice-wedge soil polygons results in several distinct microhabitats separated from one another by only a * Present address: Ecosystems Center, Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, Massachusetts 02543, U.S.A. 0022-0477/79/llO~l025$02.00 0 1 9 7 9 Blackwell Scientific Publications few decimetres (Black 1954; Britton 1957). Plant growth and species-distribution are conspicuously and reproducibly affected by this microrelief (Wiggins 1951 ; Britton 1957; Webber 1978). ...... Approximate vertical and horizontal scales are shown (the vertical scale of the ice wedges is exaggerated). 1027 G. R. SHAVER et al. snow and frozen melt-water (Black 1954; Lachenbruch 1962). Repeated annual cracking and ice growth appear to produce ice wedges several metres deep and one to several metres wide at Barrow. ...Ecotypic Differentiation in Carex Aquatilis on Ice-Wedge Polygons in the Alaskan Coastal TundraArticleNov 1979J ECOL F Stuart Chapin III W. D. Billings Gaius R Shaver(1) Growth and nutrient relations of Carex aquatilis were examined in the field and in glasshouse-grown plants from five polygon microhabitats in wet meadow tundra at Barrow, Alaska. These habitats can occur within 1 m of each other, and differ greatly in soil moisture, availability of N and P and thaw depth. (2) Field-grown plants from these microhabitats differed between populations in above-ground weight per tiller, leaf-production rate, root:leaf weight ratio, rate of uptake of 32P, and concentration of sugar, N and P in roots and rhizomes. Tissue concentrations of N and P were correlated with corresponding availability in the soil but not with plant size. There was a moderate positive correlation between soil moisture and plant size. (3) Carex aquatilis populations grown in the glasshouse with either no addition or moderate addition of phosphate showed no significant differences in plant size, but large differences in tissue-nutrient concentrations, 32P-uptake kinetics and responsiveness to phosphorus availability. A strong effect of phosphorus stress on nitrogen and potassium metabolism was observed. Responsiveness of 32P-uptake kinetics to changed conditions was inversely related to the degree of responsiveness in growth rate and mineral accumulation in the tissues. (4) These ecotypic differences among populations of Carex aquatilis are remarkable in view of the extreme rarity of reproduction by seed in the field, and the close proximity of the populations.ViewShow abstract... The effect of the growth of ice-wedges on soil morphology is illustrated inFig. 1. Black (1954) has shown that ice-wedges may grow at rates up to 1.5 mm. per year. Pressures produced in the soil by the expansion of ice-wedges cause soil material to be squeezed and contorted, and may elevate the adjacent soil surface. ...Arctic Soil Classification and Patterned GroundArticleJan 1962 J. V. Drew J. C. F. TEDROWDiscusses relationships between soils and patterned ground, observed in northern Alaska; and suggests a classification descriptive of both. Such is desirable because of the extent to which frost action and the microrelief of patterned ground influence soil morphology in arctic areas. Specific ground patterns often occur with particular genetic soils. The patterned-ground classification by A.L. Washburn (No. 48863) with minor revisions, could be integrated with that of the soil types.ViewShow abstract... Permafrost and ground-ice conditions are of major concern to scientists and engineers working on global change studies, resource development, foundation design, and protection of the environment in cold regions. To assess this concern, mapping of permafrost and ground-ice distribution has been a preoccupation of geologists and geocryologists in all major permafrost regions for at least the last 50 years (e.g., Black 1954; Ferrians 1965; Brown 1978; Pe\u00b4we\u00b41983Pe\u00b4we\u00b4Pe\u00b4we\u00b41983; Shi and Mi 1988; Yershov 1988 Yershov /1989 Heginbottom et al. 1995). Hundreds of permafrost maps have ...Statistics and characteristics of permafrost and ground-ice distribution in the Northern HemisphereArticleFull-text availableMar 2008Polar Geogr Tingjun Zhang K. Knowles Jervon Brown Roger Graham BarryThe recently published digital version of the International Permafrost Association (IPA) Circum\u2010Arctic Map of Permafrost and Ground Ice Conditions (the IPA map), together with ancillary data sets of the global land cover characteristics data base and the Global Land One\u2010kilometer Base Elevation data base, are used to investigate the distribution of permafrost and ground ice in the Northern Hemisphere. Our study indicates that permafrost underlies approximately 22.79 \u00d7 10 km or 23.9% of the exposed land area of the Northern Hemisphere. Permafrost extends from 26\u00b0N in the Himalayas to 84\u00b0N in northern Greenland. Approximately 70% of the permafrost is distributed between 45\u00b0N and 67\u00b0N. Generally, permafrost with high ice content (>20% by volume) and relatively thick overburden cover (>5 to 10 m) is found at high latitudes, representing approximately 8.57% of the total permafrost area, or 2.02% of the exposed land area of the Northern Hemisphere. Permafrost with low ice content (ViewShow abstract... R.F. Black[18]writes that \" permafrost is defined on the basis of temperature and thus may consist of any type of natural or artificial material, whether consolidated by ice or not. \" In 1976, the same author[19]claims that \" the definition is based exclusively on temperature, irrespective of texture, degree of induration, water content, or lithologic character. ...The cryosphere and glacial permafrost as its integral componentArticleFull-text availableDec 2012 Wojciech Dobi\u0144skiSince Earth sciences have undertaken studies of other celestial bodies, its various fields have moved beyond the scope of study assigned to them by name. Interest in space makes it necessary to abandon research geocentrism and reverse relations when comparing the structure of the Earth with other celestial bodies. As an exceptional place in the universe, it should not be the Earth which constitutes a reference point, especially in cryospheric research, but rather the other celestial bodies of our planetary system. This approach, referred to as \u201cSpatial Uniformitarianism,\u201d is the basis for determining the place of ice in the environment and for assigning it to the lithosphere. Ice can be penetrated by frost just as other minerals and rocks, so the occurrence of permafrost may yet be attributed to glaciers and ice-caps. In the article, the occurrence of glacial permafrost has been worked out on the basis of a thermal classification of glaciers with a thorough understanding of the phenomenon. This allows us to specify permafrost\u2019s presence beneath glaciers and ice-caps, a concept which had been needlessly vague. Further, by considering rock glaciers as a mixture of two types of rocks, and by understanding the importance of movement in their evolution, we are now closer to fruitfully determining their role in the environment, their geomorphological significance.ViewShow abstractStatistics and characteristics of permafrost and ground\u2010ice distribution in the Northern Hemisphere 1ArticleFull-text availableApr 1999Polar Geogr Tingjun Zhang K. Knowles Jervon Brown Roger Graham BarryViewExpulsion of petroleum hydrocarbons from shale source rocksArticleFeb 1983 A. S. Mackenzie M. Bjor|[oslash]|y D. Leythaeuser R.G. SchaeferThere is compelling evidence that movement of petroleum from organic-rich shales into sandstones and limestones, occurs in the subsurface1. This expulsion of material must occur if crude oil accumulations are to form, and it is termed primary migration2. Earlier studies3,4 suggested that this movement occurs with chemical fractionation: some components are more mobile than others. One of the agents of expulsion at early maturity stages is compaction, which is not only capable of forcing water, but also organic components out of the pore network of a source rock2,5,6. Because the fractionation effects associated with expulsion provide clues to the transport mechanisms involved, we have made detailed quantitative comparisons of the hydrocarbons of shales of different thicknesses, the centre and edges of thick shales and sandstones adjacent to shales from two cored, interbedded shale and sandstone sequences from Spitsbergen Island, Svalbard, Norway. These observations confirm considerable movement of hydrocarbons in the subsurface, with lower molecular weight components being more mobile. Up to 90% the original amount of n-pentadecane may be lost from very thin shales sandwiched between sandstone horizons and from shales close to a lithological boundary with sandstone.ViewShow abstractThe mapping of permafrostArticleMay 2009 J. A. HeginbottomDescribes how permafrost maps have been compiled and the nature of the data sources that have been used. Given the extent of permafrost in Canada, and the increasing pressure for development in the north, accurate information about the properties and distribution of frozen ground and ground ice is indispensable, particularly for the engineering of most energy and mineral- related projects. The permafrost maps of Canada must therefore be continually updated. -from AuthorViewShow abstractDeep Convolutional Neural Networks for Automated Characterization of Arctic Ice-Wedge Polygons in Very High Spatial Resolution Aerial ImageryArticleFull-text availableSep 2018 Weixing Zhang Chandi Witharana Anna Liljedahl Mikhail KanevskiyThe microtopography associated with ice-wedge polygons governs many aspects of Arctic ecosystem, permafrost, and hydrologic dynamics from local to regional scales owing to the linkages between microtopography and the flow and storage of water, vegetation succession, and permafrost dynamics. Wide-spread ice-wedge degradation is transforming low-centered polygons into high-centered polygons at an alarming rate. Accurate data on spatial distribution of ice-wedge polygons at a pan-Arctic scale are not yet available, despite the availability of sub-meter-scale remote sensing imagery. This is because the necessary spatial detail quickly produces data volumes that hamper both manual and semi-automated mapping approaches across large geographical extents. Accordingly, transforming big imagery into \u2018science-ready\u2019 insightful analytics demands novel image-to-assessment pipelines that are fueled by advanced machine learning techniques and high-performance computational resources. In this exploratory study, we tasked a deep-learning driven object instance segmentation method (i.e., the Mask R-CNN) with delineating and classifying ice-wedge polygons in very high spatial resolution aerial orthoimagery. We conducted a systematic experiment to gauge the performances and interoperability of the Mask R-CNN across spatial resolutions (0.15 m to 1 m) and image scene contents (a total of 134 km2) near Nuiqsut, Northern Alaska. The trained Mask R-CNN reported mean average precisions of 0.70 and 0.60 at thresholds of 0.50 and 0.75, respectively. Manual validations showed that approximately 95% of individual ice-wedge polygons were correctly delineated and classified, with an overall classification accuracy of 79%. Our findings show that the Mask R-CNN is a robust method to automatically identify ice-wedge polygons from fine-resolution optical imagery. Overall, this automated imagery-enabled intense mapping approach can provide a foundational framework that may propel future pan-Arctic studies of permafrost thaw, tundra landscape evolution, and the role of high latitudes in the global climate system.ViewShow abstractEngineering Geologic Maps of Northern Alaska, Harrison Bay QuadrangleArticleFull-text available Donald C. Meares JOHN P. GALLOWAY L. DAVID CARTER David HouseknechtViewThe use of geophysical methods in permafrost investigation: Iron ore deposits of the central part of the Labrador Trough, Northeastern CanadaArticleDec 1974GEOFORUM M.K SeguinA brief summary of our knowledge of permafrost is presented. The general properties and the thermal regime of permafrost encountered in the Schefferville area are discussed. The factors influencing the occurrence or disappearance of permafrost are discussed individually. Attempts to determine the mechanical and thermal properties of frozen rock materials, with the aim of relating these to geophysical results and to the various blasting responses appear to represent the best approach. In addition to the mapping of topography, drainage patterns, distribution and type of vegetation, snow cover and installation of thermistors, electrical resistivity surveys, borehole geophysical techniques and seismic refraction method are now recognized as important tools in predicting and outlining permafrost zones where blasting and handling procedures of iron ore are very expensive and difficult. Examples and results of such studies carried out on the Timmins 1, Timmins 4, and Fleming 3 deposits are presented. As the mining operations will move northwards into the Timmins, Barney, Goodwood, Leroy and Kivivic groups of deposits, an increasing percentage of the mining activities will be located in permafrost; consequently, it is of the utmost importance to develop a technique permitting a rapid and accurate prediction of permafrost zones in order to reduce prohibitive costs of operation. The delineation of permafrost in a particular deposit has many practical applications such as the demarcation of areas where trenching and test pitting is planned, prediction of ground conditions for test and tonnage drilling, delineation of areas of open cast walls which will be affected by permafrost and consecutive importance in slope design, operational planning of areas where free digging is possible during dirt (overburden) stripping and economic planning of mining operations, particularly with respect to drilling and blasting costs. Additional important applications include the delineation of areas of potential water problems during operations due to the presence of permafrost in the wall rocks and broad outline of the blasting patterns and choice of charge distributions to be used.ZusammenfassungNach kurzem \u00dcberblick \u00fcber die Dauerfrostforschung wird das W\u00e4rmeregime im Dauerfrostboden von Schefferville (Labrador) mit besonderer Beachtung der einzelnen Faktoren er\u00f6rtert. Neben der Kartierung der Morphologie, der Gew\u00e4sser, der Verbreitung und Art der Vegetation und der Schneedecke sowie der Installierung von Thermistoren haben sich die Messung des elektrischen Widerstandes, Bohrlock- und seismische Messungen als die besten Mittel zur Bestimmung des Permafrostes erwiesen, wo es f\u00fcr den Erzbergbau darauf ankommt. Beispiele solcher Untersuchungen betreffen die Eisenerzlagerst\u00e4tten Timmins 1 und 4 und Fleming 3 (Schefferville). Mit dem Vorr\u00fccken des Tagebaues nach Norden ger\u00e4t er immer mehr in den Dauerfrostboden. Dessen genaue Feststellung ist wichtig f\u00fcr die Rentabilit\u00e4t der Abbauma\u00dfnahmen.R\u00e9sum\u00e9Le comportement de la r\u00e9sistivit\u00e9 \u00e9lectrique et l'obtention des vitesses de propagation des ondes sismiques dans les roches situ\u00e9es dans un environnement tel que la temp\u00e9rature se situe en-dessous du point de cong\u00e9lation sont de la plus grande importance car environ le un septi\u00e8me de la surface terrestre est gel\u00e9e ou couverte de fa\u00e7on permanente par les glaces ou la neige. On s'attend \u00e0 ce que d'une part la r\u00e9sistivit\u00e9 \u00e9lectrique du perg\u00e9lisol soit tr\u00e8s \u00e9lev\u00e9e puisque la r\u00e9sistivit\u00e9 \u00e9lectrique de la glace est tr\u00e8s grande et d'autre par \u00e0 ce que la vitesse de propagation des ondes augmente dans le perg\u00e9lisol qui a pour effet de donner une plus grande coh\u00e9sion \u00e0 la roche et de faire varier ses constantes \u00e9lastiques. Ces deux caract\u00e9ristiques ont \u00e9t\u00e9 observ\u00e9es dans des zones de perg\u00e9lisol discontinues aux environs de Schefferville, partie centrale de la fosse du Labrador. L'application de ces deux techniques g\u00e9ophysiques, soient la r\u00e9sistivit\u00e9 \u00e9lectrique et la sismique r\u00e9fraction, permet de d\u00e9limiter l'\u00e9tendue lat\u00e9rale et verticale des lentilles de perg\u00e9lisol dans des gisements de fer enrichi et de diminuer le co\u00fbt du dynamitage, broyage et tamissage du minerai de fer.ViewShow abstract210Po content in sea water and its accumulation in southern Baltic planktonArticleFeb 1988MAR BIOL Bogdan Skwarzec Ryszard BojanowskiThis paper presents the results of an investigation from 1980 to 1985 on the content of 210Po in sea water and its accumulation in southern Baltic plankton. The mean value of the 210Po concentration in sea water has been determined to be about 0.5 mBq dm-3, with the proportion of the dissolved forms being ca 80%. It has been proved that 210Po is accumulated by plankton organisms. The mean 210Po concentration factors calculated on the basis of its content in plankton fall within the range from 5103 to 4.2104 and increase as follows: phytoplankton210Po concentration in mesozooplankton collected at the Slupsk Trough and the Gdask Basin have been observed. The above differences have been related to intense blue-green alga blooming in the Gdask Basin.ViewShow abstractPolonium, uranium and plutonium in the Southern Baltic SeaArticleJan 1999Czech J Phys Bogdan SkwarzecThis paper presents the results of the measurement of polonium, uranium and plutonium alpha radio-nuclides in seawater and biota of the southern Baltic ecosystem as well as the recognition of their accumulation processes in the trophic chain. Investigation of the polonium210Po and plutonium239+240Pu concentrations in Baltic biota revealed that these radionuclides are strongly accumulated by some species. Mean values of the bioconcentration factor (BCF) fell within the range 9\u00b7102 to 3.7\u00b7104. The Baltic Sea algae, benthic animals and fish concentrated uranium radioisotopes only to a small extent and mean BCF values for this element range from 1 to 55, which is several orders of magnitude lower than that for polonium and plutonium. Moreover, it was found that Baltic fish constitute an important source of polonium210Po for humans.ViewShow abstractGeochemistry of fresh groundwater in the main landscape zones of the EarthArticleDec 2009GEOCHEM INT+ Stepan Lvovich ShvartsevViewA review of the relationship of rock weathering and climate and its significance to foundation engineeringArticleOct 1970ENG GEOL P. G. Fookes M.K. SaundersThis paper is a preliminary review of the large field embraced by climate and engineering aspects of the weathering of rock.Factors affecting weathering and the development of residual soils in general and their relationship to the engineering classifications of weathered materials are briefly discussed. The development of residual soils within four principal climatic zones of the world: periglacial, temperate, arid and humid tropical, is examined in more detail. The engineering behaviour of the residual soils in these zones is reviewed and compared, firstly by considering the engineering properties of the various soils and secondly by their performance as foundation material. The results of the review are summarised in the form of tables and figures.It is concluded from the work that generalized knowledge of climate and engineering behaviour of weathering rock and residual soils is helpful in the planning of engineering projects and in the economic design of site investigations, but it is emphasised each site must be investigated on its own merits.ViewShow abstractPeriglacial Wedges and the Late Pleistocene Environment of Wyoming's Intermontane BasinsArticleMar 1981QUATERNARY RES Brainerd MearsNonsorted polygons in the uppermost 2 to 3 m beneath Pleistocene surfaces indicate permafrost at 1340 m and higher elevations in the intermontane and piedmont plains of Wyoming during the Wisconsin, and perhaps earlier, glacial maxima. The polygons, as much as 10 m in diameter, are delineated by wedges that vary in depths, range from narrow to moderately flared forms, and deform host materials. The wedges have silty fine-to-medium sand matrices (largely eolian) with pebbles or clasts from hosts of gravel or bedrock. Some wedges may reflect seasonal cracking in a periglacial active zone, but most are either permafrost sand-wedge relics or, less commonly, ice-wedge casts. Alternative explanations are rejected largely because similar features are apparently lacking in the lower and warmer plains from eastern Colorado southward. The wedges suggest an arid, windy, periglacial environment whose mean-annual temperatures are conservatively estimated as some 10\u00b0 to 13\u00b0C colder than those at present. Although late Wisconsin-early Holocene floral and faunal evidence indicates lowered montane biotic zones, the eolian and periglacial features indicate a lack of extensive forest cover on the basin floors. In conjunction with vertebrate-fossil associations of grazing and tundra animals, the wedges may provide a parallel line of evidence for a former periglacial steppe, or \u201csteppe-tundra\u201d, in the Wyoming basins.ViewShow abstractIce\u2010wedge casts and relict polygonal patterns in ScandinaviaArticleJan 1988J Quaternary Sci Harald SvenssonIce-wedge casts in Scandinavia frequently occur in three regions: (a) southwestern Jutland (outside the limit of the Weichselian glaciation); (b) southwestern Sweden; and (c) northernmost Norway. The latter two areas are both early deglaciated regions. Characteristics of casts in vertical sections are discussed with reference to the host and infilling material. Aerial photographs provide an effective tool for detecting relict ice-wedge polygons (crop marks, micromorphology). Experience from present-day permafrost regions with active ice-wedge formation helps to explain the palaeoclimatic significance of the relict polygons. Attempts to establish the ages of formation are discussed from a methodological point of view.ViewShow abstract\"Canons\" revisited and reviewed: Lester King's views of landscape evolution considered 50 years laterArticleOct 2003GEOL SOC AM BULL, GSA Bulletin C. R. TwidaleFifty years after its publication, Lester King's Canons of Landscape Evolution is reviewed and is considered in light of subsequent trends and actual developments. Some of his ideas, such as the role of scarp recession and the antiquity of some surfaces, remain current. His broad view of the world and his interest in major relief anticipated trends that are now fashionable. Some of his interpretations, however, and in particular his downgrading of the importance of structural factors and his linking of scarp retreat and pedimentation, have not stood the test of time. Other concepts, such as the etch or two-stage origin of forms, which were mooted but not fully appreciated in King's day, have come to the forefront, and technological advances in dating and survey, particularly of the ocean floors, have signaled new perspectives in landscape interpretation. Nevertheless, King's was a courageous attempt to provide guidelines for landscape study.ViewShow abstractIce Wedge Casts and Past Permafrost Distribution in North AmericaArticleDec 1973GEOFORUM Troy L. P\u00e9w\u00e9Ice wedge casts are the most accurate and widespread indicators of past permafrost. Many ice wedge casts exist in Alaska, some in areas of existing ice wedges. In addition to indicating paleotemperature conditions and a wider distribution of permafrost in Wisconsinan time than now, casts in Alaska also indicate permafrost in Iliinoian and pre-lllinoian time. Hundreds of ice wedge casts are now known in temperate North America and are described from about 22 widespread localities coast to coast in Canada and United States. Permafrost existed in late Wisconsinan time, 20,000 to 10,000 years ago, along the glacial border in temperate United States. Later permafrost formed north of the glacial border as the continental ice sheet withdrew exposing drift to the rigorous periglacial climate. Ice wedge casts indicate that the \u2212 7 \u00b0C mean annual air isotherm was about 2000 km farther south in late Wisconsinan time than now.ZusammenfassungFossile Eiskeile sind die zuverl\u00e4ssigsten und am weitesten verbreiteten Merkmale einstigen Dauerfrosts. In Alaska gibt es viele Beispiele daf\u00fcr. In einigen Gebieten sind die Eiskeile noch rezent Sie markieren nicht nur das Dauerfrostareal des Wisconsin (WOrm), sondern lassen sich auch f\u00fcr das Illinois (Riss) und noch fr\u00fcher datieren. Aus dem jetzt gem\u00e4\u00dfigten Klimabereich Nordamerikas sind Hunderte von fossilen Eiskeilen bekannt Sie werden von 22 verschiedenen Lokallt\u00e4ten in Canada und USA beschrieben. Dauerfrost herrschte im Sp\u00e4t-Wisconsin vor 20\u201310000 Jahren entlang dem Inlandeisrand in USA. Mit dem Eisr\u00fcckzug breitete sich der Dauerfrost \u00fcber die nun dem strengen Periglazialklima ausgesetzten Grundmor\u00e4nen aus. F\u00fcr das Sp\u00e4t-Wisconsin lassen die fossilen Eiskeile auf eine S\u00fcdw\u00e4rtsverschiebung der \u2212 7 \u00b0C mittleren jahresisotherme um ca. 2000 km schlie\u00dfen.ViewShow abstractA thermodynamical study of the Martian permafrostArticleJan 1979J GEOPHYS RES Enrico Flamini M. CoradiniAn outstanding result of the Viking mission has been the detection of water vapor in the Martian environment. The only possible reservoir for the water, where no evidence of surface frost has been detected, is the soil. Comparative morphologic analyses of periglacial terrestrial and Martian terrains suggested that permafrost can play an important role in forming many surficial structures as the Valles Marineris landslides or the collapse structures in the volcanic region of Tharsis. In this paper a study of the thermodynamics which regulate the processes of thawing and freezing of the layers of permafrost on Mars has been carried out. The equation of the heat propagation has been solved under Martian conditions both in the case of periodic variations of the surface temperature and in the case of an anomalous heating of the ground. Seasonal temperature variations do not allow survival of CO2 or clathrate permafrost down to a depth of 15 m. The existence of a secular 'active layer' of about 100-m depth has been demonstrated.ViewShow abstractPermafrost Occurrence in the Front Range, Colorado Rocky Mountains, U.S.A.ArticleJan 1971J GLACIOL Jack Ives Barry D. FaheyIn contrast to the extensive and rapidly growing body of knowledge on permafrost in the Eurasian and North American Arctic and sub-Arctic, little is known about permafrost occurrence in the high mountain regions of the world. Preliminary results of permafrost studies from the Colorado Rocky Mountains are presented. Above tree line (about 3 500 m) in the Front Range, scattered patches of permafrost begin to occur under wet sites blown free of snow in winter with a mean annual air temperature of about \u2014 1.0\u00b0C. At greater elevations, with correspondingly lower mean annual air temperatures (extreme case \u2014 9.0\u00b0C and 4400 m), permafrost becomes more extensive and probably exceeds 60 m in thickness. These initial results are derived from a skeleton ground-temperature observation program supplemented by indirect evidence and by data gathered from engineering and mining operations in the high country. It is probable that under the higher summits and ridge crests the alpine equivalent of the continuous zone of Arctic permafrost can be anticipated.ViewShow abstractFreeze-Thaw Frequencies and Mechanical Weathering in CanadaArticleJan 1959 J. Keith FraserfInvestigates freeze-thaw cycles (a rise to 34 F following a drop to 28 F) as a cause of rock disintegration by comparing their frequencies in northern and southern Canada. Cycles counted at 42 weather stations showed an increase from north to south: nine at Eureka on Ellesmere Island in 1949 as compared with 74 at Regina, Saskatchewan. Correlation between the freeze-thaw frequencies and diurnal temperature range is indicated; average at Eureka is 12 F at Regina 24 F. The greater evidence of rock disintegration in northern Canada therefore does not result from lower temperatures or freeze-thaw frequency. Other explanations are offered.ViewShow abstractGeneration and migration of light hydrocarbons (C2C7) in sedimentary basinsArticleDec 1979ORG GEOCHEM Chris Cornford B. Weiner D. Leythaeuser R.G. SchaeferSixty-five samples from selected source bed-type shale sequences from three exploration wells were analysed for yield and detailed composition of light hydrocarbons(C2\ue5f8C7) by a new hydrogen stripping/capillary gas chromatographic technique. In spite of low maturation levels (0.35\u20130.55% vitrinite reflectance), significant generation of ethane and propane was recognized in a Jurassic source bed sequence bearing hydrogen-poor kerogens. Light hydrocarbon generation in another and mature Jurassic source rock sequence is controlled by kerogen quality. Associated with a change from hydrogen-poor to hydrogen-rich kerogens, yields of total and most individual hydrocarbons exhibit orders-of-magnitude increases. At the same time, iso/n-alkane ratios for butanes, pentanes and heptanes decrease significantly. A study of an interbedded marine/nonmarine coal-bearing sequence of Upper Carboniferous age from the Ruhr area, West Germany, revealed that a marine shale unit in comparison to the adjacent coal seam is more prolific in generating n-alkanes of increasing molecular size.A case history for migration of light hydrocarbons by means of diffusion through shales is presented. In two shallow core holes in Campanian/Maastrichtian shales in West Greenland, upward diffusion of ethane to pentane range hydrocarbons is an active process within the near-surface 3 m interval. Diffusive losses within this interval amount to 99.8% for propane, 85.6% for n-butane and 38.9% for n-pentane.ViewShow abstractSubdued Mountains of Central EuropeChapterDec 2013 Michael Dietze Arno Kleber Heike Bullmann B. TerhorstSlope deposits, which veil entire slopes or large parts of them in a rather uniform manner (cover beds), are ubiquitous in the subdued mountains of Central Europe. Here we provide an overview of the current state of knowledge on these deposits. The Central European cover beds are divided into (1) the upper layer that is ubiquitously distributed and displays a relatively constant thickness; (2) the intermediate layer the distribution of which is mainly restricted to flat relief, to slope depressions, and to lee-ward facing slopes; and (3) the basal layer, which is rather widespread again. Both the upper and intermediate layer contain intermixed loess, whereas the basal layer is free of loess and typically has a high bulk density. Aside from the loess content, the composition of the layers differs, reflecting varying portions of crushed and chemically weathered rock allocated from up-slope. This causes notable diversity depending on bedrock and, thus, induces remarkable regional differences.Cover beds were mainly formed by periglacial gelifluction. The upper layer formed in the Late Glacial possibly during several short episodes of activity. In contrast, the underlying layers may be diachronous; nevertheless, they display recurring vertical sequences. This is probably due to the fact that loess-free layers usually could not deposit as long as there was loess in the environs, which may have been inherited from older deposits. Thus, the last phase of surface wash, during which older loess was removed, determines the age of the lower layers.ViewShow abstractPermafrost. The Contemporary Meaning of the Term and its ConsequencesArticleFull-text availableJan 2012 Wojciech Dobi\u0144skiNowadays the term \u2018permafrost\u2019 means the thermal state of the ground, for which the temperature limit value is 0\u00b0C remaining for at least two years. It is the effect of the climate where the average annual temperature of the air is -1\u00b0C or lower. As a result of air temperature, it does not need to contain ice, so it can no longer be called underground glaciation, and the only processes which are subject to permafrost are aggradation and degradation. Also the occurrence of permafrost in the geographical environment is conditioned neither by the presence of water nor its phase change - freezing, as the cryotic state is its synonym. Although it is known that the majority of permafrost dates back to the Pleistocene, still the determination of its age is difficult because it consists in determining \u2018the age of the temperature\u2019, as it were. The maximum thickness of permafrost occurs in the Antarctic, and it is estimated to reach 2600 m. Permafrost covers more than 25% of the Earth surface together with ice-sheets and ice-caps.ViewShow abstractExtremophiles HandbookChapterJan 2011 S. K. Han Brian Lanoil Jill Ann MikuckiIntroductionA significant portion of the Earth\u2019s biosphere is found in perennially cold environments (less than 5\u00b0C) including the deep ocean, frozen soils, terrestrial glaciers, perennially ice-covered lakes, and polar sea ice and ice sheets (Priscu and Christner 2004). Approximately 20% of Earth\u2019s surface is currently ice-covered with the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets covering ~10% of the terrestrial land surface. This ice stores ~75% of the Earth\u2019s freshwater supply (Paterson 1998). The Antarctic ice sheets, which contain ~90% of the planet\u2019s ice, would result in a sea level rise of ~70 m if it melted (http:// www. nsidc. org). Approximately 20% of world\u2019s soil ecosystems are frozen ground (permafrost). Ice is a dynamic feature on our planet and a key regulator of the global climate system; how cold systems will respond to a warming world is of fundamental concern. The awareness that icy systems harbor cold-loving microorganisms raises new questions about climatic feed ...ViewShow abstractGroundwater protection in permafrost regionsArticleJan 2000Grundwasser E.V. Pinneker Sergeii W. AlekseewThe peculiarities of anthropogenic impacts under the specific hydrological conditions of the permafrost are described using examples from Eastern Siberia. The hazards for these groundwaters depend on their situation relative to the frozen water-tight permafrost bodies. The human activities influence the groundwater in permafrost areas mainly by deterioration of the natural landscape, by contamination of suprapermafrost water and of seasonal melt water in surficial soils, by man-induced formation of ice sheets, especially at extrusion points of intraperma-frost waters, and by destruction of the permafrost body due to the disposal of brines.ViewShow abstractTundra vegetation as a rangeland resourceChapterJan 1988 David R. Klein Peter C. LentTundra rangelands comprise about 10% of the earth\u2019s land surface. They provide forage all or part of the year for millions of wild and domestic reindeer and for muskoxen as well as summer range for other domestic ungulates. Arctic tundra habitats are of international significance because of their importance to waterfowl and other migratory bird species. Tundra plant growth is generally nutrient limited, especially N limited. Wildlife and domestic species exploit tundra to take advantage of short periods of vigorous growth and very high quality forage. Nutrient dynamics within individual plants are rapid and complex and herbivores must respond accordingly for optimal forage intakes. Snowcover is an especially important ecological factor in tundra rangelands, affecting soil-moisture, plant survival, plant community composition, phenology of growth, and access to winter forage by large herbivores moving above and through the snowcover and by small herbivores moving below the snow surface. Heavy grazing has frequently reduced or eliminated deciduous shrubs and preferred lichen species. Graminoids may be either increasers or decreasers depending upon the specific circumstances. Repeated grazing on summer ranges by species such as reindeer and geese may lead to formation of highly productive lawn-like graminoid communities. Numerous secondary metabolites have now been identified in tundra plants, especially evergreen shrubs. Their effectiveness as defenses against mammalian herbivory and their ecological roles, as in influencing microtine population cycles, are still poorly understood. Tundra vegetation is sensitive to disturbance and stress, especially where permafrost is present but also in alpine environments where effects of recreational use are of concern. Remote sensing techniques for classifying and monitoring tundra rangelands are relatively well developed. Rehabilitation techniques are also being developed and some are now available to the vegetation manager.ViewShow abstractFROST ACTION, activity, cracking, heaving, riving, splitting, shattering, weathering, wedging, groundFrost actionChapterJan 1968 Lee WilsonViewIce-Wedge Polygons of Northern AlaskaChapterJan 1982 Robert F. BlackIce-wedge polygons, commonly 5\u201330 m in diameter, are strikingly developed over the Arctic Coastal Plain of northern Alaska. Troughs over ice wedges that outline the polygons are a few centimeters to several meters wide. Centers of polygons are flat, high centered, or low centered in a continuum in which relief generally is several decimeters to a meter. I adopted or modified techniques and equipment of glaciologists and petrologists to study ice wedges in the field and laboratory in northern Alaska. Semi-permanent thin sections aggregating 10,330 cm2 from 44 wedges were photographed and studied. Numerous observations in the field and laboratory by other techniques revealed grain size and shape, and other parameters that aid in our understanding of the origin of ice wedges. All ice wedges megascopically and microscopically exhibit marked lineation and foliation of air bubbles and other inclusions, dimensional lineation of ice crystals, and lineation of optic axes with maxima in fabric diagrams generally 10\u201335%. The fabrics are complicated and not uniform from one wedge to another, nor even necessarily from one part of a wedge to another. Not all fabrics can be explained. Deformation fabrics and growth fabrics are superimposed on each other. Growth of ice occurs in contraction cracks, and later compression produces shear and recrystallization under strong temperature gradients. Ground-contraction and expansion was measured in five sites and the results correlated with observations and measurements on the ice content of permafrost and its thermal regime. Clearly the permafrost responds like ice to temperature changes. These and other results substantiate the contraction theory for origin of ice wedges outlined decades ago by E. de K. Leffingwell. The annual addition of ice to permafrost may lead in 5,000\u20137,000 years or more to massive ice wedges, instability, and initiation of thaw lakes. Man\u2019s works may initiate a thaw cycle.ViewShow abstractThe Gelisol Order in Soil TaxonomyChapterJan 2004 Robert J. Ahrens James Bockheim Chien-Lu PingAlthough Soil Taxonomy attempts to account for all the soils in the world, taxa for permafrost regions of the world did not receive adequate attention until recently. This can be attributed to the low human population of permafrost regions and the limited suitability for traditional cultivated agriculture.ViewShow abstractCold\u2013temperate transition surface and permafrost base (CTS-PB) as an environmental axis in glacier\u2013permafrost relationship, based on research carried out on the Storglaci\u00e4ren and its forefield, northern SwedenArticleSep 2017QUATERNARY RES Micha\u0142 Glazer Wojciech Dobi\u0144ski Mariusz GrabiecHere, we present empirical ground penetrating radar (GPR) and electroresistivity tomography data (ERT) to verify the cold-temperate transition surface-permafrost base (CTS-PB) axis theoretical model. The data were collected from Storglaci\u00e4ren, in Tarfala, Northern Sweden, and its forefield. The GPR results show a material relation between the glacial ice and the sediments incorporated in the glacier, and a geophysical relation between the \u201ccold ice\u201d and the \u201ctemperate ice\u201d layers. Clearly identifying lateral glacier margins is difficult, as periglacial and glacial environments frequently overlap. In this case, we identified areas showing permafrost aggradation already under the glacier, particularly where the CTS is replaced by the PB surface. This structure appears as a result of the influence of a cold climate over both the glacial and periglacial environments. The results show how these surfaces form a specific continuous environmental axis; thus, both glacial and periglacial areas can be treated uniformly as a specific continuum in the geophysical sense. Similarly, other examples previously described also allow identifying a continuation of permafrost from the periglacial environment onto the glacial base. In addition, the ERT results show the presence of double-layered periglacial permafrost, possibly suggesting a past climatic fluctuation in the study area.ViewShow abstractPermafrost - Relation between ice content and dielectric losses at 100 KArticleDec 1973EARTH PLANET SC LETT Rom\u00e1n AlvarezThe dielectric response of permafrost at 100 K and vacuums of around 10 ntorr is analyzed, varying its percent ice content from 1 to 18.6. The distributions obtained correspond to dielectric relaxations of the Cole-Cole type, with maximum losses occurring in the 30- to 600-Hz frequency range. The logarithms of such maxima depend linearly on the permafrost ice content, two regions of linear variation being defined above and below 3.6% ice content. Such relations point out the feasibility of determining ice content in permafrost by electromagnetic means.ViewShow abstractThis research doesn't cite any other publications.AdJoin ResearchGate to find the people and research you need to help your work.15+ million members118+ million publications700k+ research projectsJoin for freeRecommended publicationsDiscover more publications, questions and projects in PermafrostArticleBottom-up estimates of CH4 emissions from northern thaw lakes: modern and paleo- perspectivesDecember 2006 F Stuart Chapin III Mary E EdwardsK. M. Walter[...] S. A. ZimovHere we describe and quantify an important source of atmospheric methane (CH4)--- ebullition (bubbling) from northern lakes--- that has not been incorporated in previous regional or global CH4 budgets. Using multiple bottom-up approaches we (1) Introduce a new method to quantify the patchiness of ebullition by direct measurement of bubbling point sources and hotspots, thereby increasing previous ... [Show full abstract] estimates of CH4 flux from lakes 5-fold in Siberia and 2.5- to 14-fold in Alaska; (2) Weight stable and radiocarbon isotope signatures of different types of ebullition (maximum 14CCH4 age of hotspots 43,000 yrs; whole lake average 16,500 yrs) demonstrating that ebullition patchiness influences estimates of regional isofluxes and that Pleistocene-age organic matter released from thawing permafrost fuels methanogenesis; (3) Use an independent mass-balance approach based on carbon lost from permafrost that thawed beneath lakes to confirm the measured flux estimate in Siberia; and (4) Verify the magnitude of lake CH4 emissions based on CH4 production potentials of organic matter from Pleistocene-aged frozen sediments. Furthermore, we apply these techniques together with a compilation of thaw lake basal ages to show that thaw lake development, a previously unrecognized source, contributed up to 70% of the rapid increase in northern sources of atmospheric CH4 recorded in ice cores during deglaciation. Given the large amount of carbon still present in Siberian permafrost (500 Gt), we predict that tens of thousands of Tg of CH4 will be released in the future from thaw lakes.Read moreArticleFull-text availableMethane Bubbling From Northern Lakes: Present and Future Contributions to the Global Methane BudgetAugust 2007 \u00b7 Philosophical Transactions of The Royal Society A Mathematical Physical and Engineering Sciences F Stuart Chapin III Laurence C. SmithK. M. WalterLarge uncertainties in the budget of atmospheric methane (CH4) limit the accuracy of climate change projections. Here we describe and quantify an important source of CH4 -- point-source ebullition (bubbling) from northern lakes -- that has not been incorporated in previous regional or global methane budgets. Employing a method recently introduced to measure ebullition more accurately by taking ... [Show full abstract] into account its spatial patchiness in lakes, we estimate point-source ebullition for 16 lakes in Alaska and Siberia that represent several common northern lake types: glacial, alluvial floodplain, peatland and thermokarst (thaw) lakes. Extrapolation of measured fluxes from these 16 sites to all lakes north of 45 degrees N using circumpolar databases of lake and permafrost distributions suggests that northern lakes are a globally significant source of atmospheric CH4, emitting approximately 24.2+/-10.5Tg CH4yr(-1). Thermokarst lakes have particularly high emissions because they release CH4 produced from organic matter previously sequestered in permafrost. A carbon mass balance calculation of CH4 release from thermokarst lakes on the Siberian yedoma ice complex suggests that these lakes alone would emit as much as approximately 49000Tg CH4 if this ice complex was to thaw completely. Using a space-for-time substitution based on the current lake distributions in permafrost-dominated and permafrost-free terrains, we estimate that lake emissions would be reduced by approximately 12% in a more probable transitional permafrost scenario and by approximately 53% in a 'permafrost-free' Northern Hemisphere. Long-term decline in CH4 ebullition from lakes due to lake area loss and permafrost thaw would occur only after the large release of CH4 associated thermokarst lake development in the zone of continuous permafrost.View full-textArticleFull-text availableComparison of Methane Content in Upper Permafrost of Eastern Siberia and AlaskaDecember 2003 Mahito Fukuda A. V. BrouchkovDue to significance of methane contribution to greenhouse effect its concentration in permafrost is an important issue; thawing of the frozen ground could affect the global carbon cycle to a substantial degree. Experiments show a potential chance of methane production in permafrost; however, importance of the process for forecast of methane content in frozen soils is problematical. Amount of ... [Show full abstract] methane trapped in permafrost is generally poorly studied; for the first time a comparison of methane content of marine and continental permafrost deposits was made. Gas samples were collected from frozen alluvial deposits from upper permafrost of Lena river valley, Eastern Siberia, and from marine deposits of Barrow, Alaska. Ice wedges and mineral soils were investigated. Maximum methane content was found in frozen soils of continental alas deposits (up to 70000 ppmv in air bubbles); however, frozen marine deposits contain large amount methane. Methane concentration up to 12000 ppmv was found in air bubbles of ice wedges of alluvial deposits in Fairbanks region, Alaska. There was no correlation found between the methane content and depth; however, thawed in past and now frozen soils contain almost no methane; therefore, methane can be easily lost due to thawing of deposits.View full-textArticleThe Knife Creek Glaciers of Katmai National Monument, AlaskaJanuary 1957 \u00b7 Journal of GlaciologyHenry W. CoulterErnest H. MullerA group of previously unmapped glaciers on the slopes of Trident and Katmai Volcanoes, southwestern Alaska, was studied for information on the abnormal regimen produced by effects of the 1912 eruption of Mount Katmai. During the eruption an area of 5 square miles (13 km. \u00b2 ) of the summit above regional snow line was destroyed, and the beheaded glaciers were buried under a blanket of pumice and ... [Show full abstract] ash. Field data are presented to indicate that the terminus of Fourth Glacier has been essentially stationary since the 1912 eruption. Upper portions of the glacier have thinned, exposing the rim of the caldera which 40 years ago was partly ringed with fringing ice cliffs. Permafrost has developed to within a few feet of the surface of the pumice mantle. Under prevailing climatic conditions Fourth Glacier may be preserved in its present static condition for an indefinite period.Read moreDiscover moreDownload citationWhat type of file do you want? RIS BibTeX Plain TextWhat do you want to download? Citation only Citation and abstractDownloadLooking for the full-text?You can request the full-text of this article directly from the authors on ResearchGate.Request full-textAlready a member? Log inorDiscover by subject areaRecruit researchersJoin for freeLoginEmail Tip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inor log in withWelcome back! Please log in.Email \u00b7 HintTip: Most researchers use their institutional email address as their ResearchGate loginPasswordForgot password? Keep me logged inLog inor log in withNo account? Sign upAboutNewsCompanyCareersSupportHelp centerFAQBusiness solutionsRecruitingAdvertisingAd\u00a9 ResearchGate 2019. All rights reserved.ImprintTermsPrivacy", "SAGE Journals: Your gateway to world-class journal research Skip to main content MENU Browse Resources Authors Librarians Editors Societies Advanced Search Browse Resources Authors Librarians Editors Societies Advanced Search Advanced Sign In Institution Society Access Options You can be signed in via any or all of the methods shown below at the same time. My Profile Sign in here to access free tools such as favourites and alerts, or to access personal subscriptions Email (required) Password (required) Remember me Forgotten your password? I don't have a profile Create Profile I am signed in as: View My Account Logout With my free profile I can: Set up\u00a0favourite journals\u00a0and register for\u00a0email alerts List\u00a0saved searches Edit account details Activate personal subscriptions\u00a0and\u00a0access content Institution If you have access to journal content via a university, library or employer, sign in here Shibboleth Open Athens I am signed in via: Institution With institutional access I can: View or download all content the institution has subscribed to. Society If you have access to journal via a society or associations, read the instructions below Members of _ can log in with their society credentials below Username (required) Password (required) Society (required) American College of Veterinary Pathologists Access to society journal content varies across our titles. If you have access to a journal via a society or association membership, please browse to your society journal, select an article to view, and follow the instructions in this box. Contact us if you experience any difficulty logging in. Some society journals require you to create a personal profile, then activate your society account Activate my Society Account I am signed in via: Institution Logout With society access I can: View or download all the content the society has access to. Need Help?\u00a0Contact SAGE Need Help? Contact SAGE SAGE Video Streaming video collections SAGE Knowledge The ultimate social sciences library SAGE Research Methods The ultimate methods library SAGE Stats Data on Demand CQ Library American political resources SAGE Journals About Privacy Policy Terms of Use Contact Us Help Browse Health Sciences Life Sciences Materials Science & Engineering Social Sciences & Humanities Journals A-Z Resources Authors Editors Reviewers Librarians Researchers Societies Opportunities Advertising Reprints Content Sponsorships Permissions Copyright \u00a9 2019 by SAGE Publications Cookies Notification This site uses cookies. By continuing to browse the site you are agreeing to our use of cookies. Find out more.", "Permafrost Cannabis Strain Information - Leafly Leafly Search Shopping bag Menu Geolocation Profile Toggle Facebook Instagram Twitter YouTube Close searchSearch LeaflyDispensaries near youPopular strainsPain-relieving strainsBeginner's guideCannabis newsYour AccountJoin LeaflyHomeStrainsDispensariesProductsCannabis 101DealsNewsClinicsCountryLeafly.comLeafly.caLeafly.esLeafly.deHelpSign outBy accessing this site, you accept the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.Are you allowed to be here?CountryUnited StatesCanadaAre you 21+ or a valid medical marijuana patient?Province/territorySelect a regionAlbertaBritish ColumbiaManitobaNew BrunswickNewfoundland & LabradorNorthwest TerritoriesNova ScotiaNunavutOntarioPrince Edward IslandQu\u00e9becSaskatchewanYukonAre you 18+?Remember me for 30 days. I confirm that this is not a shared device.NoYesRedirecting you toSorry, you're not old enough to visit Leafly.Sorry, Leafly isn't available in your location yet.Love cannabis?Keep up with new strains, products, trends, and deals with Leafly\u2019s curated cannabis newsletter.Sign UpPlease enter a valid email address and try again.By submitting this form, you will be subscribed to news and promotional emails from Leafly and you agree to Leafly\u2019s Terms of Service and Privacy Policy. You can unsubscribe from Leafly email messages anytime. Home Hybrid Permafrost | Permafrost {{value}} {{symbol}}Per {{category}}Hybrid Permafrost 4.2| 369 Reviews Buy Strain Nearby Overview Availability Reviews (369) Photos (75) Favorite Favorite Favorite Review What is Permafrost? Permafrost, bred\u00a0by Rogue Buds,\u00a0is a sativa-dominant hybrid named for its frosty coat of crystal trichomes and fresh pine aroma. While some believe Permafrost to be the love child of Trainwreck and White Widow, others claim it comes from Kali Mist and Trinity Snow. True to its hybrid genetics, Permafrost\u2019s relaxing effects are balanced between mind and body. Larger doses demonstrate the strain\u2019s potency:\u00a0as sensory detail peaks, attention becomes transfixed, and a full-body calm takes over. For this reason, Permafrost may help patients treating ADD/ADHD and anxiety symptoms, and others have reported its success in treating arthritis, asthma, multiple sclerosis, and gastrointestinal disorders. Where to Buy Permafrost View All () Permafrost Effects and Attributes Effects Medical Negatives Euphoric Energetic Uplifted Happy Relaxed Depression Stress Pain Fatigue Headaches Dry Mouth Dry Eyes Anxious Dizzy Paranoid Permafrost Genetics and Grow Info Lineage Parents of Permafrost Trainwreck {{value}} {{symbol}}Tw {{category}}Hybrid White Widow {{value}} {{symbol}}Ww {{category}}Hybrid Permafrost Flavors 1. Earthy 2. Pine 3. Sweet Review Highlights View All (369) Most Helpful lorian 11/5/2014 10:59 PM 11/5/2014 10:59 PM \u201cI still like this stain better than most. Tastes good, you get nice and high and it doesn't give you couch lock , so you can get your stuff done during the day.\u201d Read Full Review Report Abuse Most Recent ariel. 2/1/2019 8:06 PM 2/1/2019 8:06 PM \u201ctook a hit so hard i fell over and dropped my bong. this is the greatest strain i have ever smoked.\u201d Read Full Review Report Abuse Photos View All (75) Most Popular In Seattle, WA Spokane, WA Puyallup, WA Tacoma, WA Bellingham, WA Bremerton, WA Everett, WA Lynnwood, WA Mount Vernon, WA Portland, OR Articles View All The 6 Best Documentaries to Watch While High Celebrate Chinese New Year With These 5 Strains The Best Cannabis Strains for Beginners 24 Strains to Prepare You for the Game of Thrones Season 4 Premiere AboutFAQContactAbout usCareersInvestor relationsSolutionsList your dispensaryList your brandBusiness log inDispensaries inLos AngelesSeattlePortlandSan FranciscoTorontoDetroitConnectShop Leafly\u00a9 2019 Leafly all rights reservedTerms of useCommercial terms of usePrivacy policy", "Perge\u0301lisol-Canada : actes de la cinquie\u0300me Confe\u0301rence canadienne sur le perge\u0301lisol = Permafrost-Canada : proceedings of the fifth Canadian Permafrost Conference. (Book, 1990) [WorldCat.org] Your Web browser is not enabled for JavaScript. Some features of WorldCat will not be available. Home WorldCat Home About WorldCat Help Search Search for Library Items Search for Lists Search for Contacts Search for a Library Create lists, bibliographies and reviews: or Search WorldCat Find items in libraries near you Advanced Search Find a Library Your list has reached the maximum number of items. Please create a new list with a new name; move some items to a new or existing list; or delete some items. Your request to send this item has been completed. Cite/Export Cite/Export Copy a citation APA (6th ed.) Chicago (Author-Date, 15th ed.) Harvard (18th ed.) MLA (7th ed.) Turabian (6th ed.) Export a citation Export to RefWorks Export to EndNote / Reference Manager Export to EasyBib Export to EndNote / Reference Manager(non-Latin) Cancel Note: Citations are based on reference standards. However, formatting rules can vary widely between applications and fields of interest or study. The specific requirements or preferences of your reviewing publisher, classroom teacher, institution or organization should be applied. Print E-mail E-mail All fields are required. The E-mail Address(es) field is required. Please enter recipient e-mail address(es). The E-mail Address(es) you entered is(are) not in a valid format. Please re-enter recipient e-mail address(es). You may send this item to up to five recipients. Enter recipient e-mail address(es): Separate up to five addresses with commas (,) The name field is required. Please enter your name. Enter your name: The subject field is required. Please enter the subject. Subject: The E-mail message field is required. Please enter the message. E-mail Message: I thought you might be interested in this item at http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/28218746 Title: Perge\u0301lisol-Canada : actes de la cinquie\u0300me Confe\u0301rence canadienne sur le perge\u0301lisol = Permafrost-Canada : proceedings of the fifth Canadian Permafrost Conference. Publisher: Que\u0301bec, Canada : Universite\u0301 Laval, Centre d'e\u0301tudes nordiques, [1990] \u00a91990 ISBN/ISSN: 2920197541 9782920197541 OCLC:28218746 Please verify that you are not a robot. Cancel Share Permalink Permalink Copy this URL to link to this page: Add a review Would you also like to submit a review for this item? Cancel Your list has reached the maximum number of items. Please create a new list with a new name; move some items to a new or existing list; or delete some items. You already recently rated this item. Your rating has been recorded Write a review Rate this item: 1 2 3 4 5 Preview this item Preview this item Checking... Perge\u0301lisol-Canada : actes de la cinquie\u0300me Confe\u0301rence canadienne sur le perge\u0301lisol = Permafrost-Canada : proceedings of the fifth Canadian Permafrost Conference. Author: Universite\u0301 Laval. Centre d'e\u0301tudes nordiques. Publisher: Que\u0301bec, Canada : Universite\u0301 Laval, Centre d'e\u0301tudes nordiques, [1990] \u00a91990 Series: Collection Nordicana, no 54. Edition/Format: Print book : Conference publication : FrenchView all editions and formats Summary: Proceedings of the fifth Canadian Permafrost Conference. Includes papers on geocryology, soil processes, hydrology, thermal regime and climate change, geophysics, engineering and some specialty sessions. Rating: (not yet rated) 0 with reviews - Be the first. Subjects Permafrost -- Canada, Northern -- Congresses. Permafrost -- Alaska -- Congresses. Sols gele\u0301s -- Canada -- Congre\u0300s. View all subjects More like this Similar Items Add library to Favorites Please choose whether or not you want other users to be able to see on your profile that this library is a favorite of yours. Allow this favorite library to be seen by others Keep this favorite library private Save Cancel Find a copy in the library Finding libraries that hold this item... Details Genre/Form: Conference papers and proceedingsCongressesCongre\u0300s Additional Physical Format: Online version:Canadian Conference on Permafrost (5th : 1990? : Que\u0301bec, Que\u0301bec?).Perge\u0301lisol-Canada.Que\u0301bec, Canada : Universite\u0301 Laval, Centre d'e\u0301tudes nordiques, \u00a91990(OCoLC)882065984 Material Type: Conference publication Document Type: Book All Authors / Contributors: Universite\u0301 Laval. Centre d'e\u0301tudes nordiques. ISBN: 2920197541 9782920197541 OCLC Number: 28218746 Language Note: Text in English and French. Description: x, 424 pages : illustrations ; 28 cm. Series Title: Collection Nordicana, no 54. Other Titles: Permafrost-Canada : proceedings of the fifth Canadian Permafrost Conference Abstract: Proceedings of the fifth Canadian Permafrost Conference. Includes papers on geocryology, soil processes, hydrology, thermal regime and climate change, geophysics, engineering and some specialty sessions. Reviews User-contributed reviews Add a review and share your thoughts with other readers. Be the first. Add a review and share your thoughts with other readers. Be the first. Tags Add tags\u00a0for\u00a0\"Perge\u0301lisol-Canada : actes de la cinquie\u0300me Confe\u0301rence canadienne sur le perge\u0301lisol = Permafrost-Canada : proceedings of the fifth Canadian Permafrost Conference.\". Be the first. Similar Items Related Subjects:(8) Permafrost -- Canada, Northern -- Congresses. Permafrost -- Alaska -- Congresses. Sols gele\u0301s -- Canada -- Congre\u0300s. Permafrost. Alaska. Canada, Northern. Dauerfrostboden. Kongress. Confirm this request You may have already requested this item. Please select Ok if you would like to proceed with this request anyway. Linked Data More info about Linked Data Primary Entity<http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/28218746> # Perg\u00e9lisol-Canada : actes de la cinqui\u00e8me Conf\u00e9rence canadienne sur le perg\u00e9lisol = Permafrost-Canada : proceedings of the fifth Canadian Permafrost Conference.\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:CreativeWork, schema:Book ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0library:oclcnum \"28218746\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0library:placeOfPublication <http://id.loc.gov/vocabulary/countries/quc> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/30527164#Topic/permafrost_canada_northern> ; # Permafrost--Canada, Northern\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/30527164#Topic/sols_geles_canada> ; # Sols gel\u00e9s--Canada\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/30527164#Topic/kongress> ; # Kongress\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/30527164#Topic/dauerfrostboden> ; # Dauerfrostboden\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/30527164#Topic/permafrost_alaska> ; # Permafrost--Alaska\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://id.worldcat.org/fast/1765168> ; # Permafrost\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://id.worldcat.org/fast/1692640> ; # Canada, Northern.\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://dewey.info/class/551.38309719/e20/> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://id.worldcat.org/fast/1204480> ; # Alaska.\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:alternateName \"Permafrost-Canada : proceedings of the fifth Canadian Permafrost Conference\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:bookFormat bgn:PrintBook ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:contributor <http://viaf.org/viaf/142695962> ; # Universit\u00e9 Laval. Centre d'\u00e9tudes nordiques.\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:copyrightYear \"1990\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:creator <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/30527164#Meeting/canadian_permafrost_conference_5th_1990_quebec_quebec> ; # Canadian Permafrost Conference (5th : 1990? : Qu\u00e9bec, Qu\u00e9bec?)\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:datePublished \"1990\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:description \"Proceedings of the fifth Canadian Permafrost Conference. Includes papers on geocryology, soil processes, hydrology, thermal regime and climate change, geophysics, engineering and some specialty sessions.\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:exampleOfWork <http://worldcat.org/entity/work/id/30527164> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:genre \"Conference publication\"@en ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:genre \"Conference papers and proceedings\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:inLanguage \"fr\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:isPartOf <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/30527164#Series/collection_nordicana> ; # Collection Nordicana ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:isSimilarTo <http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/882065984> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Perg\u00e9lisol-Canada : actes de la cinqui\u00e8me Conf\u00e9rence canadienne sur le perg\u00e9lisol = Permafrost-Canada : proceedings of the fifth Canadian Permafrost Conference.\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:productID \"28218746\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:workExample <http://worldcat.org/isbn/9782920197541> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0wdrs:describedby <http://www.worldcat.org/title/-/oclc/28218746> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.Related Entities<http://dewey.info/class/551.38309719/e20/>\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Intangible ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/30527164#Meeting/canadian_permafrost_conference_5th_1990_quebec_quebec> # Canadian Permafrost Conference (5th : 1990? : Qu\u00e9bec, Qu\u00e9bec?)\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a bgn:Meeting, schema:Event ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:location <http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/30527164#Place/quebec_quebec> ; # Qu\u00e9bec, Qu\u00e9bec?)\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Canadian Permafrost Conference (5th : 1990? : Qu\u00e9bec, Qu\u00e9bec?)\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/30527164#Place/quebec_quebec> # Qu\u00e9bec, Qu\u00e9bec?)\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Place ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Qu\u00e9bec, Qu\u00e9bec?)\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/30527164#Series/collection_nordicana> # Collection Nordicana ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a bgn:PublicationSeries ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:hasPart <http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/28218746> ; # Perg\u00e9lisol-Canada : actes de la cinqui\u00e8me Conf\u00e9rence canadienne sur le perg\u00e9lisol = Permafrost-Canada : proceedings of the fifth Canadian Permafrost Conference.\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Collection Nordicana ;\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/30527164#Topic/dauerfrostboden> # Dauerfrostboden\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Intangible ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Dauerfrostboden\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/30527164#Topic/kongress> # Kongress\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Intangible ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Kongress\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/30527164#Topic/permafrost_alaska> # Permafrost--Alaska\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Intangible ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:hasPart <http://id.loc.gov/authorities/subjects/sh2005001377> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Permafrost--Alaska\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/30527164#Topic/permafrost_canada_northern> # Permafrost--Canada, Northern\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Intangible ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:hasPart <http://id.loc.gov/authorities/subjects/sh2005001377> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Permafrost--Canada, Northern\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://experiment.worldcat.org/entity/work/data/30527164#Topic/sols_geles_canada> # Sols gel\u00e9s--Canada\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Intangible ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Sols gel\u00e9s--Canada\"@fr ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://id.loc.gov/vocabulary/countries/quc>\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Place ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0dcterms:identifier \"quc\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://id.worldcat.org/fast/1204480> # Alaska.\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Place ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Alaska.\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://id.worldcat.org/fast/1692640> # Canada, Northern.\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Place ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Canada, Northern.\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://id.worldcat.org/fast/1765168> # Permafrost\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Intangible ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Permafrost\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://viaf.org/viaf/142695962> # Universit\u00e9 Laval. Centre d'\u00e9tudes nordiques.\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:Organization ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:name \"Universit\u00e9 Laval. Centre d'\u00e9tudes nordiques.\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://worldcat.org/isbn/9782920197541>\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:ProductModel ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:isbn \"2920197541\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:isbn \"9782920197541\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/882065984>\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a schema:CreativeWork ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0rdfs:label \"Perg\u00e9lisol-Canada.\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:description \"Online version:\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:isSimilarTo <http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/28218746> ; # Perg\u00e9lisol-Canada : actes de la cinqui\u00e8me Conf\u00e9rence canadienne sur le perg\u00e9lisol = Permafrost-Canada : proceedings of the fifth Canadian Permafrost Conference.\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.<http://www.worldcat.org/title/-/oclc/28218746>\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0a genont:InformationResource, genont:ContentTypeGenericResource ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:about <http://www.worldcat.org/oclc/28218746> ; # Perg\u00e9lisol-Canada : actes de la cinqui\u00e8me Conf\u00e9rence canadienne sur le perg\u00e9lisol = Permafrost-Canada : proceedings of the fifth Canadian Permafrost Conference.\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0schema:dateModified \"2018-11-10\" ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0void:inDataset <http://purl.oclc.org/dataset/WorldCat> ;\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0\u00a0.Content-negotiable representationsTurtle (text/turtle)JSON-LD (application/ld+json)RDF/XML (application/rdf+xml)N-TRIPLES (text/plain)HTML+RDFa (text/html) Languages: \u010cesky \u00a0|\u00a0 Deutsch \u00a0|\u00a0 English \u00a0|\u00a0 Espa\u00f1ol \u00a0|\u00a0 Fran\u00e7ais \u00a0|\u00a0 Italiano \u00a0|\u00a0 Nederlands \u00a0|\u00a0 Portugu\u00eas \u00a0|\u00a0 \u0e20\u0e32\u0e29\u0e32\u0e44\u0e17\u0e22 \u00a0|\u00a0 \ud55c\uad6d\uc5b4 \u00a0|\u00a0 \u65e5\u672c\u8a9e \u00a0|\u00a0 \u4e2d\u6587(\u7e41\u9ad4) \u00a0|\u00a0 \u4e2d\u6587(\u7b80\u4f53) You: Sign In | Register | My WorldCat | My Lists | My Watchlist | My Reviews | My Tags | My Saved Searches WorldCat: Home | About | Help | Search Legal: Copyright \u00a9 2001-2019 OCLC. All rights reserved. | Privacy Policy | Terms and Conditions WorldCat is the world's largest library catalog, helping you find library materials online. Learn more \u203a\u203a Follow WorldCat: Please sign in to WorldCat\u00a0Don't have an account? You can easily\u00a0create a free account. User Name: Password: Remember me on this computer Cancel Forgot your password?", "French illustration pencil paper fabric by pergelisol on Etsy Group 3 Created with Sketch. We now offset carbon emissions on every delivery. Learn more. Close Beginning of a dialog window, including tabbed navigation to register an account or sign in to an existing account. Both registration and sign in support using google and facebook accounts. Escape will close this window. Register Sign in Get started Continue with Facebook Continue with Google We'll never post without your permission. OR Email or Username Have an account? Sign in Just one more step\u2026 Create your Etsy password Create Your Etsy Account Continue with Facebook Continue with Google We'll never post without your permission. OR First Name Email Password Confirm Password By clicking Register, you agree to Etsy's Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Etsy may send you communications; you may change your preferences in your account settings. Uh oh! You need to have cookies enabled to sign in. Welcome back Nice\u2014you already have an Etsy account. Sign in with Facebook Sign in with Google OR Email or Username Password Stay signed in Forgot your password? Forgot your username or email? Reopen your account? Etsy Search Search for items or shops Search Skip to Content Sell on Etsy Sell Register Sign in Discover Cart Cart 0 Jewelry & Accessories Clothing & Shoes Home & Living Wedding & Party Toys & Entertainment Art & Collectibles Craft Supplies Vintage Gifts All Jewelry & Accessories Accessories Bags & Purses Necklaces Rings Earrings Bracelets Body Jewelry All Jewelry Hats & Caps Beanies & Winter Hats Hair Accessories Headbands Fascinators & Mini Hats Wreaths & Tiaras Sunglasses & Eyewear Scarves & Wraps Belts & Suspenders Keychains & Lanyards Gloves & Mittens Umbrellas & Rain Accessories All Accessories Backpacks Handbags Clutches & Evening Bags Shoulder Bags Diaper Bags Luggage & Duffel Bags Phone Cases All Bags & Purses Pendants Chokers Charm Necklaces Crystal Necklaces Monogram & Name Necklaces Beaded Necklaces Chains Bib Necklaces Tassel Necklaces All Necklaces Stackable Rings Statement Rings Bands Signet Rings Multistone Rings Solitaire Rings Midi Rings Wedding & Engagement Engagement Rings Wedding Bands Promise Rings Bridal Sets All Rings Dangle & Drop Earrings Stud Earrings Hoop Earrings Chandelier Earrings Ear Jackets & Climbers Cluster Earrings Cuff & Wrap Earrings Clip On Earrings All Earrings Beaded Bracelets Bangles Charm Bracelets Woven & Braided Bracelets Cuff Bracelets Chain & Link Bracelets All Bracelets Anklets Hair Jewelry Nose Rings & Studs Arm Bands Nipple Jewelry Belly Rings Shoulder Jewelry Toe Rings Lip Rings All Body Jewelry Editors' Picks Jewelry shop All Clothing & Shoes Women's Men's Kids' & Baby Bags & Purses Women's Clothing Dresses Tops & Tees Skirts Pants & Capris Sweaters Swimwear Women's Shoes Boots All Women's Men's Clothing Shirts Sweaters Men's Shoes Boots All Men's Baby Girls' Clothing Girls' Clothing Dresses Skirts Tops Jackets & Coats Sweaters Baby Boys' Clothing Boys' Clothing Tops Jackets & Coats Sweaters Girls' Shoes Boots Boys' Shoes Boots All Kids' & Baby Backpacks Handbags Clutches & Evening Bags Shoulder Bags Diaper Bags Luggage & Duffel Bags Phone Cases All Bags & Purses Editors' Picks Women's fashion All Home & Living Home Bath & Beauty Pet Supplies Home D\u00e9cor Wall D\u00e9cor Decorative Pillows Picture Frames & Displays Candles & Holders Clocks Vases Wreaths & Door Hangers Rugs Furniture Bedding Bathroom Outdoor & Gardening Storage & Organization Office Lighting Kitchen & Dining Food & Drink Spirituality & Religion All Home Bath Accessories Makeup & Cosmetics Skin Care Hair Care Essential Oils Fragrances Soaps & Bath Bombs Sex Toys All Bath & Beauty Pet Collars & Leashes Pet Furniture Pet Clothing & Shoes Pet Bedding Pet Carriers & Houses All Pet Supplies Editors' Picks Design ideas and inspiration All Wedding & Party Party Supplies Invitations & Paper Wedding Decorations Wedding Gifts Wedding Accessories Wedding Clothing Wedding Jewelry All Wedding Party D\u00e9cor Baking & Cake Decoration All Party Supplies Invitations & Announcements Wedding Invitations Wedding Invitation Kits Wedding Templates Save The Dates Stationery Greeting Cards Gift Wrapping All Invitations & Paper Centerpieces Cake Toppers Serving & Dining Cake Servers & Knives Table D\u00e9cor Candles & Holders Baskets & Boxes Ring Bearer Pillows Plants All Wedding Decorations Bridesmaids Gifts Wedding Favors Gifts For The Couple Groomsmen Gifts Guest Books Portraits & Frames Albums & Scrapbooks All Wedding Gifts Something Blue Bouquets & Corsages Veils Bags & Purses Cover Ups & Scarves Hair Accessories Barrettes & Clips Decorative Combs Fascinators & Mini Hats Hair Jewelry Hair Pins Wreaths & Tiaras Cummerbunds Neckties Umbrellas Hats All Wedding Accessories Dresses Bridal Gowns & Separates Bridesmaid Dresses Flower Girl Dresses Mother of the Bride Dresses Lingerie & Garters Suits All Wedding Clothing Earrings Rings Engagement Rings Wedding Bands Bridal Sets Necklaces Bracelets Jewelry Sets All Wedding Jewelry Editors' Picks Etsy weddings Toys Baby & Toddler Toys Dolls & Action Figures Stuffed Animals Games & Puzzles Learning & School Kids' Crafts Slime & Foam Electronics & Accessories Cell Phone Accessories Gadgets Video Games Decals & Skins Cameras Computers & Peripherals Books Blank Books Calendars & Planners Book Accessories Children's Books Art & Photography Books Comics & Graphic Novels Craft & Hobby Books Literature & Fiction Poetry Guides & How Tos Zines & Magazines Movies & Music Musical Instruments Instrument Straps Recorded Audio Sheet Music All Movies All Music All Toys & Entertainment Editors' Picks Home tech accessories Prints Photography Painting Oil Watercolor Acrylic Sculpture Glass Art Drawing & Illustration Mixed Media & Collage Fiber Arts Dolls & Miniatures Collectibles Figurines & Knick Knacks Memorabilia Coins & Money All Art & Collectibles Editors' Picks Home gallery All Craft Supplies & Tools Home & Hobby Jewelry & Beauty Sewing & Fiber Papercraft Visual Arts Sculpting & Forming Woodworking & Carpentry Home Improvement Electronics & Circuitry Framing Doll & Model Making Candle Making Food & Fermenting Floral & Garden Crafts Gardening & Plants Floral Arranging All Home & Hobby Jewelry Making & Beading Beads Cabochons Charms Jewelry Findings Pendants Makeup & Face Painting All Jewelry & Beauty Knitting Crochet Sewing Quilting Embroidery Cross Stitch All Sewing & Fiber Card Making & Stationery Scrapbooking Bookbinding Stamping Origami Party & Gifting All Papercraft Painting Printing & Printmaking Drawing & Drafting Photography Collage Calligraphy & Pens All Visual Arts Ceramics & Pottery Metalworking Carving & Whittling All Sculpting & Forming Editors' Picks DIY craft projects Take full advantage of our site features by enabling JavaScript. Learn more pergelisol French illustration - pencil, paper, fabric ! Lalbenque, France &vert; 35 Sales 0 out of 5 stars (7) pergelisol French illustration - pencil, paper, fabric ! Lalbenque, France 35 Sales On Etsy since 2012 0 out of 5 stars (7) Shop owner Caroline Chinal Contact Items (16) Reviews About Policies Goldfish Aquarium A3 Print Mural Art Fish Pencil & Gouache Illustration $14.10 Favorite Add to Organic Tote Bag - Organic cotton - Cute Apple & Polka Dots Print - Long handles Shoulder Carrying Toffee Apple Fuchsia Brown Limited print $18.80 Favorite Add to Organic Tote Bag - Organic cotton - Cute Apple & Polka Dots Print - Long handles Shoulder Carrying LIght Creamy Pink Brown Limited print $18.80 Favorite Add to Bon-Point (x 5) - Retro - Cherries - For kids - Well done $2.94 Favorite Add to Announcement For dreamers \u2601 funny stationery \u2601 illustrated cards \u2601 brooches & home decor \u2601 illustrated stuffs for kids and grown-ups \u2601 If you want to know more about my work go to www.pergelisol.fr Announcement For dreamers \u2601 funny stationery \u2601 illustrated cards \u2601 brooches & home decor \u2601 illustrated stuffs for kids and grown-ups \u2601 If you want to know more about my work go to www.pergelisol.fr Contact shop owner Caroline Chinal Contact shop owner Items Sections All 16 cards 3 stationery 2 home decor 1 bags 2 original art 4 #jarjarproject Upcycling 4 Sort: Custom Sort Custom Relevance Most Recent Lowest Price Highest Price All 16 cards 3 stationery 2 home decor 1 bags 2 original art 4 #jarjarproject Upcycling 4 Request Custom Order Contact shop owner 35 Sales 205 Admirers Report this shop to Etsy You reported this shop Original illustration - Purple Garlic - Watercolor & Pencil - Wall art Home decor Cute Botanical Study Botany Plant Vegetable Veggie Artwork $140.98 Free shipping Favorite Add to Original illustration - Purple Garlic - Watercolor & Pencil - Wall art Home decor Cute Botanical Study Botany Plant Vegetable Veggie Artwork $140.98 Free shipping Favorite Add to Original illustration - Zucchini - Watercolor & Pencil - Wall art Home decor Cute Botanical Study Botany Plant Vegetable Veggie Artwork $140.98 Free shipping Favorite Add to Original illustration - Strawberry - Watercolor & Pencil - Wall art Home decor Cute Botanical Study Botany Plant Fruit Artwork $140.98 Free shipping Favorite Add to Upcycled Glass Jar | One of a Kind | Art on Glass | Li'l Fruit serie 1 #JarJarProject $35.24 Favorite Add to Upcycled Glass Jar | One of a Kind | Art on Glass | Mermaids serie 3 #JarJarProject $35.24 Favorite Add to Upcycled Glass Jar | One of a Kind | Art on Glass | Mermaids serie 2 #JarJarProject $35.24 Favorite Add to Goldfish Aquarium A3 Print Mural Art Fish Pencil & Gouache Illustration $14.10 Favorite Add to Illustrated bookmark - Fruit & co - strawberry pear blueberry apricot pig bunny rabbit kid duckling - pencil illustration cute kawaii $2.11 Favorite Add to Illustrated postcard - mini series - Marcellin Rabbit & hills - Teatime Friends - Illustration watercolour Pencil Cute Art $2.94 Favorite Add to Illustrated postcard - Brown chick - Round corners - Hen & chicks - Mum $2.94 Favorite Add to Postcard mini series - illustrated - Smiling Cat in the rain - Flying Sheep - Bonne journ\u00e9e ! - pencils & gouache - Cute Illustration $2.94 Favorite Add to Upcycled Glass Jar | One of a Kind | Art on Glass | Mermaids serie 1 #JarJarProject $35.24 Favorite Add to Bon-Point (x 5) - Retro - Cherries - For kids - Well done $2.94 Favorite Add to Organic Tote Bag - Organic cotton - Cute Apple & Polka Dots Print - Long handles Shoulder Carrying Toffee Apple Fuchsia Brown Limited print $18.80 Favorite Add to Organic Tote Bag - Organic cotton - Cute Apple & Polka Dots Print - Long handles Shoulder Carrying LIght Creamy Pink Brown Limited print $18.80 Favorite Add to View all 16 items 16 of 16 items Reviews No reviews in the last year karieline on Jan 28, 2014 5 out of 5 stars Beautiful and well-made, a very charming addition to any child's bedroom. Highly recommended! Sale -30% - RENATA Barnab\u00e9 - Apple soft cushion - hand stitched - OOAK Sale -30% - RENATA Barnab\u00e9 - Apple soft cushion - hand stitched - OOAK Gemma on Jan 7, 2014 5 out of 5 stars just lovely x x x Thank you so much Postcard - illustrated - Turnip - limited serie Postcard - illustrated - Turnip - limited serie marmotte on Nov 17, 2013 5 out of 5 stars Package very carefully wrapped. The card is lovely. Thank you so much! I love my purchase! Carte postale simple illustr\u00e9e - Mouton & ballons - s\u00e9rie limit\u00e9e Carte postale simple illustr\u00e9e - Mouton & ballons - s\u00e9rie limit\u00e9e View all 7 reviews 3 of 7 reviews About Once upon a time... There was a girl who liked inventing rather nice characters, and who also liked leaves, flowers, fruits, snow and cicadas. There were also two hands which wanted to make things which could go to the other persons, cheer up a house, make a little dream or cause a smile, pencils which wanted to put a few colors on some paper... And perg\u00e9lisol was born. Share on Facebook Save to Pinterest Save to Pinterest Tweet Share on Facebook Save to Pinterest Save to Pinterest Tweet Around the web Website Blog Shop members Caroline Owner, Maker, Designer, Shipping... Production partners Imprimeur Italy Impression offset sur papier satin\u00e9 Imprimeur United Kingdom Impressions papier Shop policies Last updated on December 6, 2013 Accepted payment methods Paypal Check Returns and exchanges I gladly accept returns Contact me within: 7 days of delivery Ship items back within: 14 days of delivery I don't accept exchanges or cancellations But please contact me if you have any problems with your order. The following items can't be returned or exchanged Because of the nature of these items, unless they arrive damaged or defective, I can't accept returns for: Custom or personalized orders Perishable products (like food or flowers) Digital downloads Intimate items (for health/hygiene reasons) Items on sale Questions about your order? Please contact me if you have any problems with your order. Returns and exchange details Les frais de retour sont \u00e0 la charge de l'acheteur. Shipping I use the most adapted shipping mode to obtain lowest possible postal charges. For international customers, I ship through French postoffice services, in thick envelope for flat items or in a box for non-flat items. Please note that shipping mode for cards and flat items don't include tracking, nor insurance, but you can ask for them with an additional cost. Bigger items will be sent with a tracking number. It is naturally possible to group shipping, please contact me before to optimize delivery fees. Footer Shop Gift cards Etsy blog Sell Sell on Etsy Teams Forums About Etsy, Inc. Policies Investors Careers Press Follow Etsy Facebook Instagram Pinterest Twitter Need help? Visit the help center US United States English (US) $ (USD) Etsy Etsy We make it easy to find your thing. \u00a9 2019 Etsy, Inc. Terms of Use Privacy Interest-based ads Update your settings Set where you live, what language you speak, and the currency you use. Learn more. Region: Region Australia Canada France Germany Greece Ireland Italy Japan New Zealand Poland Portugal Russia Spain The Netherlands United Kingdom United States Afghanistan Albania Algeria American Samoa Andorra Angola Anguilla Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Aruba Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Bouvet Island Brazil British Indian Ocean Territory British Virgin Islands Brunei Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Cayman Islands Central African Republic Chad Chile China Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Colombia Comoros Congo, Republic of Cook Islands Costa Rica Croatia Cura\u00e7ao Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Ethiopia Falkland Islands (Malvinas) Faroe Islands Fiji Finland France French Guiana French Polynesia French Southern Territories Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Gibraltar Greece Greenland Grenada Guadeloupe Guam Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Heard Island and McDonald Islands Holy See (Vatican City State) Honduras Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iraq Ireland Isle of Man Israel Italy Ivory Coast Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kosovo Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macao Macedonia Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Martinique Mauritania Mauritius Mayotte Mexico Micronesia, Federated States of Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Montserrat Morocco Mozambique Myanmar (Burma) Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands Antilles New Caledonia New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria Niue Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestinian Territory, Occupied Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Reunion Romania Russia Rwanda Saint Helena Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Martin (French part) Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino Sao Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Sint Maarten (Dutch part) Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands South Korea South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Svalbard and Jan Mayen Swaziland Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand The Netherlands Timor-Leste Togo Tokelau Tonga Trinidad Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Turks and Caicos Islands Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States United States Minor Outlying Islands Uruguay U.S. Virgin Islands Uzbekistan Vanuatu Venezuela Vietnam Wallis and Futuna Western Sahara Yemen Zaire (Democratic Republic of Congo) Zambia Zimbabwe Language: Language Deutsch English (UK) English (US) Espa\u00f1ol Fran\u00e7ais Italiano \u65e5\u672c\u8a9e Nederlands Polski Portugu\u00eas \u0420\u0443\u0441\u0441\u043a\u0438\u0439 Currency: Currency $ United States Dollar (USD) $ Canadian Dollar (CAD) \u20ac Euro (EUR) \u00a3 British Pound (GBP) $ Australian Dollar (AUD) \u00a5 Japanese Yen (JPY) K\u010d Czech Koruna (CZK) kr Danish Krone (DKK) $ Hong Kong Dollar (HKD) Ft Hungarian Forint (HUF) \u20aa Israeli Shekel (ILS) RM Malaysian Ringgit (MYR) $ Mexican Peso (MXN) $ New Zealand Dollar (NZD) kr Norwegian Krone (NOK) \u20b1 Philippine Peso (PHP) $ Singapore Dollar (SGD) kr Swedish Krona (SEK) Swiss Franc (CHF) \u0e3f Thai Baht (THB) NT$ Taiwan New Dollar (TWD) z\u0142 Polish Zloty (PLN) R$ Brazilian Real (BRL) Save Start typing the name of a page. Hit ESC to close, Enter to select the first result.", "An Error Occurred Setting Your User Cookie An Error Occurred Setting Your User Cookie This site uses cookies to improve performance. If your browser does not accept cookies, you cannot view this site. Setting Your Browser to Accept Cookies There are many reasons why a cookie could not be set correctly. Below are the most common reasons: You have cookies disabled in your browser. You need to reset your browser to accept cookies or to ask you if you want to accept cookies. Your browser asks you whether you want to accept cookies and you declined. To accept cookies from this site, use the Back button and accept the cookie. Your browser does not support cookies. Try a different browser if you suspect this. The date on your computer is in the past. If your computer's clock shows a date before 1 Jan 1970, the browser will automatically forget the cookie. To fix this, set the correct time and date on your computer. You have installed an application that monitors or blocks cookies from being set. You must disable the application while logging in or check with your system administrator. Why Does this Site Require Cookies? This site uses cookies to improve performance by remembering that you are logged in when you go from page to page. To provide access without cookies would require the site to create a new session for every page you visit, which slows the system down to an unacceptable level. What Gets Stored in a Cookie? This site stores nothing other than an automatically generated session ID in the cookie; no other information is captured. In general, only the information that you provide, or the choices you make while visiting a web site, can be stored in a cookie. For example, the site cannot determine your email name unless you choose to type it. Allowing a website to create a cookie does not give that or any other site access to the rest of your computer, and only the site that created the cookie can read it.", "An Error Occurred Setting Your User Cookie An Error Occurred Setting Your User Cookie This site uses cookies to improve performance. If your browser does not accept cookies, you cannot view this site. Setting Your Browser to Accept Cookies There are many reasons why a cookie could not be set correctly. Below are the most common reasons: You have cookies disabled in your browser. You need to reset your browser to accept cookies or to ask you if you want to accept cookies. Your browser asks you whether you want to accept cookies and you declined. To accept cookies from this site, use the Back button and accept the cookie. Your browser does not support cookies. Try a different browser if you suspect this. The date on your computer is in the past. If your computer's clock shows a date before 1 Jan 1970, the browser will automatically forget the cookie. To fix this, set the correct time and date on your computer. You have installed an application that monitors or blocks cookies from being set. You must disable the application while logging in or check with your system administrator. Why Does this Site Require Cookies? This site uses cookies to improve performance by remembering that you are logged in when you go from page to page. To provide access without cookies would require the site to create a new session for every page you visit, which slows the system down to an unacceptable level. What Gets Stored in a Cookie? This site stores nothing other than an automatically generated session ID in the cookie; no other information is captured. In general, only the information that you provide, or the choices you make while visiting a web site, can be stored in a cookie. For example, the site cannot determine your email name unless you choose to type it. Allowing a website to create a cookie does not give that or any other site access to the rest of your computer, and only the site that created the cookie can read it.", "International Permafrost Association - Posts | Facebook Jump toSections of this pageAccessibility HelpPress alt + / to open this menuFacebookEmail or PhonePasswordForgot account?HomeAboutEventsPhotosVideosCommunityReviewsPostsInfo and AdsSee more of International Permafrost Association on FacebookLog InorCreate New AccountSee more of International Permafrost Association on FacebookLog InForgot account?orCreate New AccountNot NowVisitor PostsMathias UlrichSeptember 26, 2017 at 10:27 PMShort report in Russian TV about the workshop of the IPA-funded Acti...on Group \"Permafrost and Culture\", which currently takes place in Vorkuta, Komi Republik, Russia. See MorePim de KlerkJanuary 6, 2017 at 6:55 AMDoing some advertising for my work again: \"Vegetation, recent pollen... deposition, and distribution of some non-pollen palynomorphs in a degrading ice-wedge polygon mire complex near Pokhodsk (NE Siberia), including size-frequency analyses of pollen attributable to Betula.\" It can be downloaded for free up to February 25th, afterwards it is only free for subscribers: https://authors.elsevier.com/a/1UL6k7uT\u2026 It is our third 1-m-distance surface sample transect and extents our insights in short-distance pollen dispersal and -deposition in Arctic Siberia, and .in the distribution of few Non-pollen palynomorphs. Furthermore, there are the preliminary results of size-frequency analyses of pollen of Betula, and addresses some important conceptual issues with this method. See MoreAlevtina AlevtinaJanuary 6, 2017 at 4:06 AMDear colleagues, we would like to draw your attention about several ...sessions focusing on soils in cold-climate environments at the next EGU General Assembly (Vienna, Austria 23-28th April, 2017). The deadline for abstract submission: 11th January 2017. SSS3.7 - Soils in Space and Time: Soils in Mountain, Boreal and Polar Environments http://meetingorganizer.copernicus.org/\u2026 SSS9.13/BG9.45/CL4.06/CR4.7 - Permafrost-affected soils http://meetingorganizer.copernicus.org/\u2026 SSS10.11/CR4.6 - Mountain soils http://meetingorganizer.copernicus.org/\u2026 Based on the contributions to these sessions, and as already done over the last years (i.e. Solid Earth, Catena, Science of the Total Environment), we will organize a Special Issue in Land Degradation & Development (Impact Factor: 8.2). This year the SI will focus on: \u201cParaglacial processes in recently deglaciated environments\u201d. If you need further information or help in the process of abstract submission please contact the conveners. See MoreEnglish (US) \u00b7 Espa\u00f1ol \u00b7 Portugu\u00eas (Brasil) \u00b7 Fran\u00e7ais (France) \u00b7 DeutschPrivacy \u00b7 Terms \u00b7 Advertising \u00b7 Ad Choices \u00b7 Cookies \u00b7 More Facebook \u00a9 2019International Permafrost AssociationYesterday at 7:37 AM \u00b7 This is the last week to submit session proposals for the 12th International Conference on Permafrost in 2020 in Lanzhou, China. Vist http://icop2020.csp.escience.cn/dct/page/70075 for more details; the call closes on March 10 at 23:59 Beijing time.International Permafrost AssociationFebruary 1 \u00b7 Today (Feb. 1) is the last day to register for the Pushchino Permafrost Conference in April. Visit http://cryosol.ru/en/cryoconference2019en.html for more information.International Permafrost Association updated their status.January 31 \u00b7 The call for session proposals for ICOP 2020 has been extended until March 10, so there is still time to develop suggestions! Visit http://icop2020.csp.escience.cn/dct/page/70075 for instructions on how to submit.International Permafrost AssociationJanuary 25 \u00b7 Learn about current happenings in permafrost research, engineering, and education! The newest edition of our annual news bulletin, Frozen Ground 42, is now available online. This volume includes: Words from the President, a EUCOP5 summary, Action Group reports, updates from our partner organizations (including the Permafrost Young Researchers Network - PYRN and the Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost - GTN-P), news from relevant projects, and a preview of our upcoming conferences in New Zealand and China.ipa.arcticportal.orgipa.arcticportal.orgInternational Permafrost AssociationJanuary 17 \u00b7 \"Permafrost is warming at a global scale\": this major paper was published yesterday in Nature Communications by our partner organization, the Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost - GTN-P. This paper exemplifies the tremendous value in monitoring permafrost temperatures and making the data available via the open-access GTN-P database.nature.comPermafrost is warming at a global scaleClimate change strongly impacts regions in high latitudes and altitudes that store high amounts of carbon in yet frozen ground. Here the authors show that the consequence of these changes is global warming of permafrost at depths greater than 10 m in the Northern Hemisphere, in mountains, and in Ant...International Permafrost AssociationJanuary 16 \u00b7 It's just the start of 2019, but it is already time to start thinking about the 12th International Conference on Permafrost happening in June 2020! Check out the website developed by the Local Organizing Committee and propose sessions by the end of the month.icop2020.csp.escience.cnThe 12th International Conference on Permafrost: HomeThe 12th InternationalConference on Permafrost (ICOP 2020) will be held in Lanzhou, China, from June 22-26, 2020. The conference themeis \"Permafrost environments under persistent warming: Challenges for scientific assessment and engineering practice\".On behalf of the local organizing committee, I wa...International Permafrost AssociationNovember 20, 2018 \u00b7 Call for permafrost enthusiasts: fill out this very brief survey on inspirational permafrost resources for a project organized by Ylva Sj\u00f6berg, Ashley Rudy, Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Bouchard, Julie Malenfant-Lepage, Marc Oliva, Matthias Siewert, Michael Fritz, and Michel Paquette.docs.google.comPermafrost Science: Sources of InspirationWe all get our ideas from somewhere. We are generally inspired by the works of other scientists in our own field, or sometimes in completely different fields of science. We are conducting a review initiative about the most influential papers or books (or other documents) in permafrost research, from...International Permafrost AssociationNovember 15, 2018 \u00b7 Looking for a permafrost job? Consider this Geotechnical Data Scientist position in Yellowknife! Applications close November 23.gov.nt.caGeotechnical Data ScientistThe Department of Industry, Tourism and Investment (ITI) works through wide-ranging partnerships and initiatives to deliver quality programs and services that promote and support economic development, diversification and prosperity in the interest of Northwest Territories residents \u2013 their busines...International Permafrost Association shared Canadian Permafrost Association / Association Canadienne du Perg\u00e9lisol's post.November 6, 2018 \u00b7 The IPA Senior Vice-President, Chris Burn, has been awarded the Canadian Polar Medal. Prof. Burn is being honoured for his contributions to permafrost science based on his work in the western Canadian Arctic, productive partnerships with stakeholders in Canada's North, and dedicated training of the next generation of northern researchers.Canadian Permafrost Association / Association Canadienne du Perg\u00e9lisolNovember 5, 2018 \u00b7 Congratulations to CPA board member Dr. Chris Burn, Carleton University, for winning the Governor General of Canada\u2019s Canadian Polar Medal! Dr. Burn has dedicat...ed his last 35 years towards researching permafrost in the western Canadian Arctic. https://ottawacitizen.com/\u2026/carleton-professor-wins-polar-m\u2026 See Moreottawacitizen.comCarleton professor wins Polar Medal for permafrost researchCarleton University professor Chris Burn has won the\u00a0Governor General\u2019s Polar Medal for permafrost research that has advanced science while having an\u00a0\u201cintimate interconnection\u2026International Permafrost AssociationNovember 1, 2018 \u00b7 This is a final reminder about our current call for new Action Groups, closing on Nov. 5! Action Groups fund targeted groups working towards well-defined, permafrost-related deliverables. More information and the full application form can be found on the IPA website: https://ipa.arcticportal.org/activities/action-groupsInternational Permafrost Association shared Canadian Permafrost Association / Association Canadienne du Perg\u00e9lisol's post.October 15, 2018 \u00b7 Last week the Canadian Permafrost Association (CPA) had their inaugural annual meeting at Yukon College in Whitehorse, complete with a hands-on workshop and field excursion. Check out the Canadian Permafrost Association / Association Canadienne du Perg\u00e9lisol page for more information and photos.Canadian Permafrost Association / Association Canadienne du Perg\u00e9lisol added 4 new photos.October 12, 2018 \u00b7 The CPA meeting started off with a great hands-on workshop in the use of electrical resistivity tomography for permafrost investigations. One objective of the CPA is to provide more workshops and short courses so stay tuned!International Permafrost Association shared Permafrost Young Researchers Network - PYRN's post.October 8, 2018 \u00b7 Permafrost Young Researchers Network - PYRNOctober 8, 2018 \u00b7 UPCOMING CONFERENCE: TRANSOILCOLD2019 \"Transportation Soil Engineering in Cold Regions\" PYRN members get discounted admission!... Call for abstracts now! Due before November 1. \u200b Conference Dates: 20 \u201323 May 2019, St. Petersburg, Russia http://conf-geotech.wixsite.com/transoilcold2019 See Moreconf-geotech.wixsite.comConference | Russia | Transoilcold2019Transoilcold2019 conference aims to provide a broader look at the overall problems faced by designers, contractors, and infrastructure owners during planning and building of transport infrastructure in cold regions.International Permafrost AssociationOctober 1, 2018 \u00b7 The IPA currently has an open call for new Action Groups! Action Groups are meant to fund targeted groups working towards well-defined, permafrost-related deliverables. More information and the application form can be found on the IPA website: https://ipa.arcticportal.org/activities/action-groupsipa.arcticportal.orgAction GroupsAction Groups are meant to fund targeted groups working towards the production of well-defined products. Action Groups are funded on a competitive basis at up to 2500\u20ac per year (maximum of 5000\u20ac over the life of an Action Group). Up to 10000\u20ac per year of the IPA total budget will be devoted to...International Permafrost AssociationSeptember 26, 2018 \u00b7 Registration is currently open for the inaugural annual meeting of the Canadian Permafrost Association (CPA)! The IPA encourages those working with permafrost in Canada to consider attending this meeting at Yukon College in Whitehorse. We are pleased to see this growing national network. \ud83c\udde8\ud83c\udde6\ufe0fyukoncollege.yk.caCanadian Permafrost Association Annual General Meeting | Yukon CollegeRegister now! October 10-12th, 2018 Yukon College, Whitehorse, Yukon We are pleased to announce the inaugural annual general meeting for the Canadian Permafrost Association (CPA). The CPA is being formed to address the multidisciplinary nature of permafrost - bridging natural and social sciences, en...International Permafrost Association added 5 new photos.July 3, 2018 \u00b7 This past weekend approximately 30 EUCOP5 participants joined local experts for regional excursions in three locations: Aosta Valley (Italy), the Valais Alps (Switzerland), and the \u00c9crins massif (France). The Valais Alps excursion, led by Christophe Lambiel of University of Lausanne and Reynald Delaloye of University of Fribourg, focused on alpine permafrost and its connection with geohazards. On the first day, the group visited Mont-Fort (3328 masl) and discussed glaciation and permafrost temperatures in this area. On the second day, participants were able to walk on top of fast-moving rock glaciers and learn about how these landforms impact the villages below by causing rockfall and debris flows.+2International Permafrost Association added 5 new photos.June 29, 2018 \u00b7 EUCOP5 officially closed on Thursday, though activities have continued with local excursions on Friday and regional excursions going over the weekend. The conference was a fantastic success by both traditional and untraditional metrics: 484 presentations were made by 443 attendees, who collectively consumed approximately 90 liters of wine and 2000 bottles of beer over the course of the week. At the closing ceremony, participants were able to reflect on the week and get excite...d about the next two IPA conferences, SouthCOP in New Zealand in December 2019 and ICOP 2020 in Lanzhou, China. PYRN Executive Committee members Helena Bergstedt and Jannik Martens presented the PYRN presentation awards to Samuel Gagnon and Constanza Morino for having the best oral and poster presentation, respectively. The IPA extends thanks to all involved for the invigorating and inspiring week! See More+2International Permafrost Association added 4 new photos.June 28, 2018 \u00b7 The past days at EUCOP5 have been packed with both indoor and outdoor scientific activity! Monday, Tuesday, and Thursday were filled with presentations during four main oral presentation sessions per day and an afternoon poster session every afternoon. Wednesday was the first of two local excursion days, with participants going to the D\u00e9rochoir rock glacier or Br\u00e9vent-Montenvers/Mer de Glace. Participants have also enjoyed networking and relaxing with colleagues during coffee breaks, lunches, and at the PYRN tartiflette evening.International Permafrost Association added 2 new photos.June 25, 2018 \u00b7 Official opening of EUCOP5 and 2018 Lifetime Achievement Award presented to Wilfried Haeberli The 5th European Conference on Permafrost officially began this morning at the Opening Ceremony at Le Majestic Congress in Chamonix. Participants were welcomed by Philip Deline on behalf of the Local Organizing Committee, the mayor of Chamonix, and IPA President Hanne Christiansen. During the ceremony, the 2018 Lifetime Achievement Award was presented to Wilfried Haeberli, a prolific... permafrost scientist and general cryosphere expert with extensive experience studying and working in the Alps. The IPA was pleased to have such a fitting occasion to honor Prof. Dr. Haeberli. The ceremony also included an overview of EUCOP5 PYRN activities by outgoing PYRN Vice-President Justine Ramage, and closing remarks by Philip Deline. Everyone is looking forward to the rest of the week! See MoreInternational Permafrost Association added 2 new photos.June 24, 2018 \u00b7 27th IPA Council Meeting held in Chamonix The Council of the International Permafrost Association convened in Chamonix, France on 24 June as part of the 5th European Conference on Permafrost (EUCOP5), an IPA regional conference. Council members reviewed the IPA\u2019s activities over the past two years (when the Council last met), and had a number of discussions related to our Regional and International Conferences on Permafrost, which are a priority of the IPA. The IPA was pleased to gather today as the governing body of the association and looks forward to the official opening of EUCOP5 tomorrow. Follow along with the upcoming week's news on our website (https://ipa.arcticportal.org/news) and here on Facebook.See More", "2015 09 17 Perg\u00e9lisol : Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Bouchard : Free Download, Borrow, and Streaming : Internet Archive Skip to main content Search the history of over 349 billion web pages on the Internet. search Search the Wayback Machine Featured texts All Texts latest This Just In Smithsonian Libraries FEDLINK (US) Genealogy Lincoln Collection Additional Collections Books to Borrow Top American Libraries Canadian Libraries Universal Library Community Texts Project Gutenberg Biodiversity Heritage Library Children's Library Open Library Books by Language Featured movies All Video latest This Just In Prelinger Archives Democracy Now! Occupy Wall Street TV NSA Clip Library TV News Top Animation & Cartoons Arts & Music Community Video Computers & Technology Cultural & Academic Films Ephemeral Films Movies Understanding 9/11 News & Public Affairs Spirituality & Religion Sports Videos Television Videogame Videos Vlogs Youth Media Featured audio All Audio latest This Just In Grateful Dead Netlabels Old Time Radio 78 RPMs and Cylinder Recordings Live Music Archive Top Audio Books & Poetry Community Audio Computers & Technology Music, Arts & Culture News & Public Affairs Non-English Audio Radio Programs Librivox Free Audiobook Spirituality & Religion Podcasts Featured software All Software latest This Just In Old School Emulation MS-DOS Games Historical Software Classic PC Games Software Library Internet Arcade Top Community Software MS-DOS Kodi Archive and Support File CD-ROM Software CD-ROM Software Library APK Vintage Software Console Living Room Software Sites Tucows Software Library Shareware CD-ROMs ZX Spectrum DOOM Level CD ZX Spectrum Library: Games Apple Computer Featured image All Image latest This Just In Flickr Commons Occupy Wall Street Flickr Cover Art USGS Maps Metropolitan Museum Top NASA Images Solar System Collection Ames Research Center Brooklyn Museum web texts movies audio software image logo Toggle navigation ABOUT CONTACT BLOG PROJECTS HELP DONATE JOBS VOLUNTEER PEOPLE search Search metadata Search text contents Search TV news captions Search archived web sites Advanced Search upload personSIGN IN ABOUT CONTACT BLOG PROJECTS HELP DONATE JOBS VOLUNTEER PEOPLE 2015 09 17 Perg\u00e9lisol Audio Preview remove-circle Internet Archive&apos;s in-browser audio player requires JavaScript to be enabled. It appears your browser does not have it turned on. Please see your browser settings for this feature. remove-circle Share or Embed This Item EMBED EMBED (for wordpress.com hosted blogs and archive.org item <description> tags) [archiveorg 20150917Pergelisol width=560 height=384 frameborder=0 webkitallowfullscreen=true mozallowfullscreen=true] Want more? Advanced embedding details, examples, and help! favorite share flag Flag this item for Graphic Violence Graphic Sexual Content Spam, Scam or Fraud Broken or Empty Data audio 2015 09 17 Perg\u00e9lisol by Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Bouchard Publication date 2015-09-17 Topics perg\u00e9lisol cycle carbone Language French Chronique diffus\u00e9e en direct \u00e0 Futur Simple, le\u00a017 septembre 2015, \u00e0 l'antenne de CKRL 89,1 Identifier 20150917Pergelisol Scanner Internet Archive HTML5 Uploader 1.6.3 plus-circle Add Review comment Reviews There are no reviews yet. Be the first one to write a review. 6 Views DOWNLOAD OPTIONS download 1 file OGG VORBIS download download 1 file TORRENT download download 1 file VBR M3U download download 1 file VBR MP3 download download 11 Files download 5 Original SHOW ALL IN COLLECTIONS Community Audio Uploaded by Futur Simple on October 9, 2015 SIMILAR ITEMS (based on metadata)", "HISTORY | Watch Full Episodes of Your Favorite Shows Sign Out Skip to content ShowsShows This Day In HistoryThis Day In History ScheduleSchedule TopicsTopics StoriesStories Visit Sign Out Your Profile Your Profile My List Profile Sign Out Your Profile Your Profile My List Profile Sign Out HISTORY ShowsShows This Day In HistoryThis Day In History ScheduleSchedule TopicsTopics StoriesStories VideosVideos Speeches & AudioSpeeches & Audio ShopShop Link HISTORY on facebook Link HISTORY on twitter Link HISTORY on gplus Link HISTORY on youtube Link HISTORY on instagram Email Updates Email Updates Shows Project Blue Book New Episodes Tuesdays at 10/9c Watch The Latest Episode Shows Knightfall Season Premiere Mon Mar 25 at 10/9c Watch A Trailer Women's History The Night of Terror: When Suffragists Were Imprisoned and Tortured in 1917 After peacefully demonstrating in front of the White House, 33 women endured a night of brutal beatings. Read Now Shows The Curse of Oak Island New Episodes Tuesdays at 9/8c Watch The Latest Episode Women's History Feminism Isn't Just a Modern Movement\u2014It Dates to Antiquity Read Now Shows Swamp People New Episodes Thursdays at 9/8c Watch The Latest Episode Shows In Premiere Forged in Fire New Episodes Wednesdays at 9/8c Watch The Latest Episode American Pickers New Episodes Mondays at 9/8c Watch The Latest Episode Pawn Stars New Episodes Mondays at 10/9c Watch The Latest Episode Truck Night in America New Episodes Thursdays at 10/9c Watch The Latest Episode Coming Soon Lost Gold of World War II Series Premiere Tue Mar 19 at 10/9c Jesus: His Life Eight-Part Event Premieres Mon Mar 25 at 8/7c This Is History Knights Templar Why the Knights Templar Gave False Confessions of Depravity Read Now The Holocaust Catholic Church to Open Long-Secret Archives on Pope Pius XII Read Now Mardi Gras First Mardi Gras: Not in New Orleans? Read Now Native American History Why Graverobbers Won't Leave Native American Burial Sites Alone Read Now Project Blue Book How 'Project Blue Book' Production Designers Evoked the Golden Age of UFOs Read Now Weather The Monster Blizzard That Turned Kansas Into a Frozen Wasteland Read Now DON'T MISS THE LATEST HISTORY PREMIERES Sign up now to get email updates on new episodes, sweeps alerts, and more from your favorite HISTORY shows. Please enter a valid email address By submitting your information, you agree to receive emails from HISTORY and A+E Networks. You can opt out at any time. More details: Privacy Notice Terms of Use Contact Us A+E Networks Our Family of Brands HISTORY homepage Around the World History Education History Vault Mobile/Apps News Shop Share Your Opinion Follow HISTORY facebook opens in new window twitter opens in new window gplus opens in new window youtube opens in new window instagram opens in new window Biography Crime and Investigation History en Espanol LRWLRW Schedule Page Military History Ad Choices Advertise WIth Us Closed Captioning Copyright Policy Corporate Information Employment Opportunities FAQ/Contact Us Privacy Notice Cookie Notice Terms Of Use TV Parental Guidelines Contact Us Copyright Policy Privacy Notice Cookie Notice Terms of Use Ad Choices Closed Captioning \u00a9 2019, A&E Television Networks, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Create a Profile to Add this show to your list! Get Started Already have a profile? Sign In", "Snow day: The 10 best snow games in sports history Email \ue60b Sign up No, thanks Are you in? Sign up for the For The Win daily email newsletter for the top stories every day. An error has occured Please re-enter your email address. Thanks for signing up! You'll now receive the top For The Win stories each day directly in your inbox. Close \u00d7 NFL NBA NCAAB MMA WWE MLB Soccer NCAAF Golf Fan Index Pro Football Fan Index College Football Fan Index Racing Tennis NHL Boxing NASCAR Culture Olympics Lists Longform Outdoors 10 best snow games in sports history 10 best snow games in sports history Sports 10 best snow games in sports history By Nate Scott February 20, 2019 7:44 am Follow\t\t\t\t\t@aNateScott shares share tweet pin sms send email By:\t\tNate Scott | February 20, 2019 7:44 am Follow @aNateScott A massive snow storm is battering the eastern seaboard of the United States today, and with tons of people stuck home from work and school, we thought we\u2019d take a moment to look back at some of the best snow moments in sports history. Sports are more fun when the weather is a mess, and these games capture that. For the purposes of this list, we are excluding sports that are played on snow and ice, so snowboarding, skiing, moguls, bobsledding, figure skating, and hockey are all out. Sorry, gang. I don\u2019t make up the rules of our fake internet lists. (I totally make up the rules of our fake internet lists.) Let\u2019s get to the 10 best snow games in sports history. 10. Bills vs. Browns 2007 Photo by Scott Boehm/Getty Images This game will always stick out as a perfect snow football game because of just how miserable it was. The Browns won 8-0, the game had to be stopped multiple times to shovel the lines on the field, and every single fan in attendance looked miserable. Perfect. 9. Orioles Opening Day 2003 (AP Photo/Nick Wass) The combination of the excitement and pageantry of Opening Day combined with the backdrop of gently falling snow made the Orioles\u2019 game against the Indians an instant Camden Yards classic. Plus it gave us this iconic play: 8. 2000 Independence Bowl A freak snowstorm in Louisiana for a bowl game between Texas A&M and Mississippi State is as wonderful as you think it is. Even better? The Bulldogs won 43-41 in an overtime thriller. 7. The 1979 Cotton Bowl (AP Photo/WFH) Notre Dame, helmed by Joe Montana, took on the University of Houston in an absolutely frigid Cotton Bowl played in 1979. The game earned the moniker The Chicken Soup Game, as it was played during the worst ice storm in Dallas in years. The match was more than just bad weather, though, as Montana led the Fighting Irish to an exciting 35-34 win. 6. The 2014 Winter Classic Julian H. Gonzalez /Detroit Free Press Ok in the intro we said no ice hockey, but I\u2019m making an exception for the 2014 Winter Classic, which gave us the glorious site of ice hockey being played on HD television with fat snowflakes falling on the Big House in Michigan. 5. The Leon Lett Game Poor Leon Lett. His Thanksgiving day blunder against the Miami Dolphins gave the Cowboys one of the more iconic losses of the franchise\u2019s history. 4. U.S. beats Costa Rica in a snow storm Qualifying for the World Cup is something no American soccer fan takes for granted anymore. This match helped them do so in the run up to the 2014 World Cup, and what a match it was \u2013 played in a snowstorm in Denver, and resulting in a 1-0 USMNT win. 3. 1967 NFL Championship: The Ice Bowl (AP Photo) The 1967 NFL Championship Game was more ice than snow, but we\u2019re going to include it here because those guys looked pretty cold and we\u2019ll give them the benefit of the doubt. The Green Bay Packers played the Dallas Cowboys at Lambeau Field in sub-zero temperatures, with the Packers winning 21-17 and claiming The Ice Bowl. 2. Michigan vs. Ohio State 1950 We move from The Ice Bowl to The Snow Bowl. The game between Michigan and Ohio State in a driving snow storm ended with Michigan winning 9-3 and claiming the Big Ten Championship, and a spot in the Rose Bowl. 1. The Tuck Rule / Vinatieri game AP Photo/Elise Amendola How else could it end? The 2001 AFC Divisional Playoff Game gave us the introduction of the \u201ctuck rule\u201d into the lexicon of even casual sports fans, the first iconic Adam Vinatieri game-winning kick, and the launch of the Patriots NFL dynasty. If this game goes differently, who knows if the Patriots even become who they become? Gallery The lamest nicknames in sports, from 'Mr. Big Chest' to 'The Claw' view 11 images Lists, snow, Sports shares share tweet pin sms send email Nate Scott Follow @aNateScott Nate Scott is the managing editor of FTW. More \u2026 Recommended Videos More FTW 51m ago Soccer Sergio Ramos' intentional suspension backfires for Real Madrid vs. Ajax 1.3k shares10hr ago NBA NBA fans can't stop piling on LeBron, who's 2-5 after activating 'playoff mode' early 1hr ago Soccer See all the goals from Ajax's stunning 4-1 win over Real Madrid From The Web The Latest 31m NCAAB 31m ago Watch Champ Week College Basketball Tonight Live on ESPN+ March 5, 2019 5:30 pm \u00b7 FTW Staff Watch Champ Week with ESPN+ on the road to the Tournament. 47m NFL 47m ago What Lincoln Riley had to say about Kyler Murray's leadership ability March 5, 2019 5:14 pm \u00b7 Andrew Joseph Kyler Murray\u2019s leadership came into question at the combine. 51m Soccer 51m ago Sergio Ramos' intentional suspension backfires for Real Madrid vs. Ajax March 5, 2019 5:09 pm \u00b7 Nate Scott Real Madrid\u2019s Sergio Ramos made the tactical decision to get a yellow card in the first leg against Ajax. That backfired (\u2026) 1hr Soccer 1hr ago USA vs. Brazil: Match Preview, How to Watch USWNT Online, SheBelieves Cup Live Stream, Start Time, TV Channel March 5, 2019 5:00 pm \u00b7 FTW Staff USA vs. Brazil: Match Preview, How to Watch USWNT Online 1hr NBA 1hr ago Houston Rockets vs Toronto Raptors: Game Preview, Live Stream, Start Time, TV Channel, How to Watch NBA Online March 5, 2019 5:00 pm \u00b7 FTW Staff Raptors vs. Rockets Stream 1hr Soccer 1hr ago See all the goals from Ajax's stunning 4-1 win over Real Madrid March 5, 2019 4:56 pm \u00b7 Nate Scott See all the goals from Ajax\u2019s stunning 4-1 win over Real Madrid that knocked the Spanish side out of the Champions League. 1hr NFL 1hr ago Mel Kiper explains why you shouldn't obsess over 40-yard dash times March 5, 2019 4:09 pm \u00b7 Nick Schwartz A blazing 40 time isn\u2019t a sure-fire indicator of a player\u2019s pro potential. 2hr MLB 2hr ago Despite MLB rules, Bryce Harper is already planning to recruit Mike Trout to the Phillies March 5, 2019 3:52 pm \u00b7 Andrew Joseph That might be tampering. 3hr Soccer 3hr ago Dortmund vs Spurs Live Stream: Lineups, How to Watch Champions League Online, US TV Channel March 5, 2019 3:00 pm \u00b7 FTW Staff Borussia Dortmund vs. Tottenham Hotspur: Champions League Match Live Stream 3hr Outdoors 3hr ago Watch: Snowmobiler\u2019s comical disappearing act March 5, 2019 3:00 pm \u00b7 David Strege Two men were riding snowmobiles on a forest road in Idaho when one of them suddenly did a comical disappearing act. Follow FTW! Social See FTW stories in your feed Like For The Win Follow For The Win Newsletter Get 10 hot stories each day Sign me up! Success Thanks for signing up. Please check your email for a confirmation. Whoa! Something went wrong. Try again? Podcast Hear FTW writers out loud Latest podcast More FTW Contact For The Win Privacy Notice/Your California Privacy Rights Terms of Service Ad Choices Powered by WordPress.com VIP Show More Information Error Please enter an email address. Success Thanks for signing up. Please check your email for a confirmation. Error Something went wrong. Home Follow us\u2026 NFL NBA NCAAB MMA WWE MLB Soccer NCAAF Golf Fan Index Pro Football Fan Index College Football Fan Index Racing Tennis NHL Boxing NASCAR Culture Olympics Lists Longform Outdoors Contact For The Win Privacy Notice/Your California Privacy Rights Terms of Service Ad Choices Powered by WordPress.com VIP https://ftw.usatoday.com/2019/02/snow-games-sports 10 best snow games in sports history From a Winter Classic to the Snow Bowl, the Ice Bowl to Leon Lett, we recount the best snow games in sports history. I found this on FTW and wanted to share: %link% For more great sports stories ... *visit For The Win: https://www.ftw.usatoday.com *follow @ForTheWin: https://www.twitter.com/forthewin *like FTW on Facebook: https://www.facebook.com/usatodayftw Post to Cancel", "Ugly history between the Flames and Wild adds intrigue to tonight\u2019s already huge game - Minnesota Wild vs Calgary Flames - Hockey Wilderness clock menu more-arrow no yes Horizontal - White Hockey Wilderness Minnesota Wild Schedule, Roster, News, and Rumors | Hockey Wilderness Log In or Sign Up Log In Sign Up 10K Rinks Radio Sections Fanposts Fanshots Library Wild Odds Shop About Masthead Community Guidelines StubHub More All 320 blogs on Horizontal - White 10K Rinks Radio 10k Rinks Radio Show Hub Sections Iowa Wild Top 25 Under 25 Fancy Stats Prospects Full Archive Fanposts Fanshots Library Minnesota Wild Draft History Helpful Links and Info Wild Stories Schedule Roster Stats Yahoo Wild News Yahoo Wild Team Page Yahoo Wild Report Yahoo Wild Depth Chart Yahoo Wild Transactions Yahoo Wild Photos Odds Shop About Masthead Community Guidelines StubHub \u2715 Ugly history between the Flames and Wild adds intrigue to tonight\u2019s already huge game New, 48 comments The last two times Minnesota has played the Flames, extracurriculars have been the story. By Jim Dowd's Pants@DarrenFunBrown Mar 2, 2019, 12:06pm CST Share Tweet Share Share Ugly history between the Flames and Wild adds intrigue to tonight\u2019s already huge game tweet share Reddit Pocket Flipboard Email David Berding-USA TODAY Sports MINNESOTA WILD AT CALGARY FLAMES9:00PM Central, Scotiabank Saddledome, Calgary, AlbertaTV: Fox Sports-North, CBC, SportsnetRadio: KFAN 100.3 and affiliatesStreaming: Fox Sports Go app, ESPN+ Well, this one could be\u2026 interesting. There\u2019s some serious history between tonight\u2019s teams, the Minnesota Wild and the Calgary Flames. Calgary has gotten the better of Minnesota in both of the previous meetings on the scoreboard, but what sticks out from those two matchups is the extracurriculars and their impacts on both teams. In the first game between these teams, December 6th, Mark Giordano kneed Mikko Koivu, leading to the Wild Kaptain missing several games and Giordano getting suspended for two. Late in that same game, Matt Dumba stepped up in the middle of the ice and flattened Mikael Backlund, for which the Flames all went crazy and chased after Dumba, eventually punching him while he was lying on the ice. Backlund did suffer a concussion on the play, and being that it was the final minute and the game was effectively over, the hit was probably not necessary. But it was ruled clean by both the referees on the ice and the league, which certainly reviewed it. Still, in the eyes of the good folks in Calgary, chasing Dumba around and punching him while he was down in that game wasn\u2019t enough punishment for that unpenalized, unsuspended hit. So fast forward two weeks to the second meeting between these teams. Early in the game, Matthew Tkachuk essentially forced Dumba to\u2026 you know\u2026 answer the bell. Well, after reluctantly fighting Tkachuk, Dumba eventually left that game, and has been out ever since with a torn pectoral muscle, which he confirmed happened in the fight. It\u2019s been a while since all of this transpired, and coach Bruce Boudreau downplayed the side drama, telling the Pioneer Press, \u201cWe need to win. That\u2019s nothing. It\u2019s all about playing the game the right way.\u201d He\u2019s right. A lot of time has passed since Tkachuk effectively ended Dumba\u2019s season, and both teams are playing great hockey with two gigantic points on the line. Playing the game is more important than settling scores tonight, which we know can end badly anyway. Still, one has to wonder if there might be any hatred between the squads that carries over from earlier in the season. CALGARY FLAMES The Flames are having a pretty magical season under new head coach Bill Peters, and that magic has been especially\u2026 magical\u2026 of late. Calgary closed out February with a seven-game winning streak that remains intact entering tonight\u2019s contest, taking it to a five-point lead over San Jose for first place in the Pacific Division. It\u2019s one of those seasons in Calgary where the stars are aligning and everyone is contributing offensively. Johnny Gaudreau has been on another planet, with 30 goals and 52 assists, offseason trade acquisition Elias Lindholm has broken out with 26 goals and 46 assists, and Sean Monahan, Tkachuk, and Giordano are each north of 60 points. David Rittich and Mike Smith have effectively split time in net, proving yet again my theory that a good team needs a 1A/1B goalie tandem to avoid extended downturns. \u2014 At the recent NHL trade deadline, the Flames made just one very minor deal to bring in something called Oscar Fantenberg, an interesting decision for a team looking to make a deep playoff run. It did get reported, though, that the Wild and Flames had a deal in place that involved Jason Zucker, but it fell through at the last minute, adding to the interesting recent history between these teams. STORYLINES Aside from all the aforementioned vitriol between these squads, it\u2019s worth noting that the Wild have been really good since the Charlie-Coyle-for-Ryan-Donato trade took place on February 20th. Minnesota has since won four straight, with Donato playing a contributing role in all four contests. The youth movement seems to be working in its infancy (pun intended), as the kids\u2014Jordan Greenway, Luke Kunin, Joel Eriksson Ek, and Donato\u2014have all stepped up in a huge way. Donato has six points in his four games and set up Zucker for the tying goal on Tuesday. Eriksson Ek scored the game winner in overtime that night as well, and Greenway and Kunin have both just been generally noticeable, with Kunin scoring a goal and an assist in the last four, and Greenway scoring two goals. Meanwhile, Kevin Fiala, who debuted against the Jets, was quiet in his first game but did have three shots and looked really good on the power play. Points will come for him as well. The Wild remain in the last playoff spot, but level in points with Colorado, which has played one more game. This weekend\u2019s back-to-backs with Calgary and Nashville are humongous for Minnesota\u2019s playoff chances. INJURIES No Dumba, no Koivu. Victor Rask is still day-to-day with a lower body injury. James Neal and Michael Stone are out for the the Flames, per Rotoworld. The Gamethread will post at 8:30PM Central. Below are the projected lineups, thanks to DailyFaceoff.com. Most Read Minnesota Boys State High School Hockey Tournament: Class A We take a look at the respective section winners that will represent the field in Class A when The Tourney kicks off on Wednesday. Minnesota Boys State High School Hockey Tournament: Class AA We take a look at the respective section winners that will represent the field in Class AA when they drop the puck on Thursday Minnesota Boys State High School Hockey Tournament: Matchups and Predictions A look at all first round matchups for both Class A and Class AA along with my bold predictions on which teams will hoist the brand spanking new \"Eveleth Trophy\" Wilderness Walk: Rematch in Nashville Catch up on the latest news in hockey before the Minnesota Wild have a rematch against the Nashville Predators later tonight! Three Things We Learned: Wild Win Streak Ends The win streak came to an end as Nashville outlasted Minnesota in a shoot-out Find Tickets Mon Mar 11 San Jose Sharks @ Minnesota Wild 7:00 PM - Xcel Energy Center - St. Paul, MN 940 tickets available Thu Mar 14 Dallas Stars @ Minnesota Wild 7:00 PM - Xcel Energy Center - St. Paul, MN 1,200 tickets available See Full Schedule From our sponsor Stubhub Logo This Article has a component height of 35. The sidebar size is long. Loading comments... Chorus FanPosts FanShots Masthead Community Guidelines Facebook Twitter YouTube Horizontal - White Contact Have a News Tip? Browse Blogs About SBN Company Blog Blog Openings Editorial Ethics and Guidelines Vox Media Terms of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Policy GDPR Commitment Communications Preferences Advertise with us Jobs @ Vox Media All Systems Operational Check out our status page for more details. \u00a9 2019 Vox Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved Sports data \u00a9 STATS 2018 tweet share", "Flyers vs. Ducks recap, score: Hart makes history in win over Anaheim - Broad Street Hockey clock menu more-arrow no yes Horizontal - White Broad Street Hockey Philadelphia Flyers Schedule, Roster, News, and Rumors | Broad Street Hockey Log In or Sign Up Log In Sign Up Fanposts Fanshots Sections Library Flyers Odds About Masthead Community Guidelines StubHub More All 320 blogs on Horizontal - White Fanposts Fanshots Sections Morning Fly By Philadelphia Flyers Prospects Lehigh Valley Phantoms Philadelphia Flyers Draft 2018 Flyers Top 25 Under 25 Full Archive Library Philadelphia Flyers Organizational Depth Chart Live Flyers News & Talk via Twitter Find your local Philadelphia Flyers bar BSH Radio, a Philadelphia Flyers podcast Blogroll Flyers Stories Schedule Roster Stats Yahoo Flyers News Yahoo Flyers Team Page Yahoo Flyers Report Yahoo Flyers Depth Chart Yahoo Flyers Transactions Yahoo Flyers Photos Odds About Masthead Community Guidelines StubHub \u2715 Flyers 6, Ducks 2: A nice way to rebound New, 5 comments Much better folks, much better. By Kyle F.@yachobscoracek Feb 9, 2019, 3:53pm EST Share Tweet Share Share Flyers 6, Ducks 2: A nice way to rebound tweet share Reddit Pocket Flipboard Email Gavin Baker/Icon Sportswire via Getty Images The Flyers win? Again? That\u2019s points in their last ten as the Flyers continue to find ways to win games. Let\u2019s take a journey together and see how we got there this afternoon. First Period The Sean Couturier line got the game off to a strong start for the Flyers, dominating the Ducks in the offensive zone for the opening minute. Carter Hart would be tested just seconds later though as Adam Henrique escaped for a breakaway. Henrique went for the shot and Hart flashed the leather with a beautiful glove save. Fun start to this game that\u2019s for sure. The good times kept coming as Michael Raffl made a fantastic play along the board to protect the puck, then center it right to the tape of Phil Varone who made no mistake. The Other Phil gave the Flyers the 1-0 lead less than five minutes in, and that goal was the epitome of the Ducks season. Their defensive struggles are no joke, and it bit them hard on this goal. Raffl finds Varone and the Flyers strike first! pic.twitter.com/nHv6H9LOmc\u2014 Broad Street Hockey (@BroadStHockey) February 9, 2019 The Ducks would make a charge after the goal however, getting their cycle game going and picking apart the Flyers defense. Hart would be up to the task however like the best boy he is, and keep the Flyers up by one. It\u2019s been said so many times, but Hart\u2019s overall calmness in net has been a treat to watch. It\u2019s something we haven\u2019t seen in Philadelphia in quite some time, and man is it fun. Even with the Ducks rebounding, it would be the orange and black picking up the game\u2019s second goal. Sean Couturier received a tricky pass from Robert Hagg that he somehow sniped by Chad Johnson to give the Flyers a 2-0 lead. This was Couturier\u2019s 23rd goal of the season, as he continues to assure us all that last year was indeed not a fluke. If he finishes strong, we could very well be watching the Selke Trophy winner for the 2018-19 season. Couturier off both posts and in! pic.twitter.com/l6WjEtFswG\u2014 Broad Street Hockey (@BroadStHockey) February 9, 2019 Oskar Lindblom would take a tripping penalty seconds later but the Ducks may as well have declined it, because Michael Raffl netted his second goal of the period with a short-handed goal making it 3-0 Flyers. Laughton made a spectacular stretch pass to Raffl, who made no mistake. I think they unleashed some frustration from the Kings game in a big way. This was a \u201cshould win\u201d game for the Flyers, and they certainly opened the game with the intentions of making sure that happened. Raffl scores shorthanded! pic.twitter.com/61QIvfuLPV\u2014 Broad Street Hockey (@BroadStHockey) February 9, 2019 The Flyers fourth goal would be the result of another great play by Couturier. He knocked down a loose puck at center ice, found a cutting Robert Hagg who dealt it to Jakub Voracek in the middle, who found Couturier, who backhanded the puck to the net front where Oskar Lindblom redirected it. Lindblom did a fantastic job of driving the net and not kicking the puck in, but redirecting it with his skate. We knew Anaheim was not a good hockey team, but this was just downright ugly. Lindblom directs the puck into the net with his skate, and extends the Flyers' lead to 4! pic.twitter.com/WEBXSE4Jz9\u2014 Broad Street Hockey (@BroadStHockey) February 9, 2019 Gameflow/heatmap after 20 Second Period The Ducks would strike first early in the second, as Adam Henrique deposited a power play goal. The play looked offside after a challenge from Scott Gordon, but the call would stand and make it a 4-1 game. Anaheim would head back to the power play as a result of the lost challenge, but the penalty kill would be up to the task this time and keep them off the board. They also pulled goaltender Chad Johnson to start the period, as backup Kevin Boyle entered the game. As the period progressed, the Flyers slowly but surely began to tighten up their defensive game. They played way too relaxed defensively in the first, and were allowing too many scoring opportunities. Those opportunities were beginning to dwindle as the period went on and the Flyers began to find their rhythm. Misha Vorobyev had a 2-on-1 chance but may as well have screamed at the Ducks defenseman that he was passing, because it was that obvious. Then Raffl, after cutting to the slot area later in the period, made a pass when he had a clean shooting lane resulting in a turnover. With 4:37 remaining in the period, Ryan Kesler would head to the box for hooking, sending the Flyers back to the man advantage. Some screened shots and solid puck movement were not enough however as the Ducks killed off the power play. The rest of the period would go without too much action, with the main chances coming from Robert Hagg joining the rush on a shot that went right into the chest of Boyle, and a pass from James van Riemsdyk to a darting Giroux that was stopped by Boyle as well. They would head into the third up by three. Gameflow/heatmap after 40 Third Period Carter Hart would waste no time making his presence felt in the opening minutes of the third, making clutch saves to keep the Flyers up three. Then, Ryan Getzlaf would head to the box on a high sticking penalty as he clipped Nolan Patrick. Puck tracking 101. pic.twitter.com/YvJMycFeJF\u2014 Broad Street Hockey (@BroadStHockey) February 9, 2019 The power play would come to an end with 43 seconds remaining however, as Shayne Gostisbehere tripped up Carter Rowney who had stolen the puck. Anaheim would roughly get 1:15 of power play time to get back in the game. They would do just that as Nick Ritchie shot one that deflected off of Radko Gudas and by Hart, making it a 4-2 game. The Flyers would get a chance to get the goal back however as the Ducks took another penalty. The power play would be uninspiring however, and fail to capitalize yet again. Anaheim would continue to apply the pressure but yet again take another penalty as Wayne Simmonds was tripped up, sending the Flyers back to the power play. Just as they were about to waste another opportunity to put the Ducks away, Nolan Patrick buried a backhand shot by Boyle to give the Flyers a 5-2 lead. He started the play with a nice zone entry, and finished it off. Not how they drew it up, but they all count the same! 5-2 Flyers. pic.twitter.com/hVIPRIBv6a\u2014 Broad Street Hockey (@BroadStHockey) February 9, 2019 Travis Konecny would tack on the final tally as he netted his 15th goal of the season after batting in a rebound in front of Boyle. the Flyers really picked up their pace in the final few minutes keeping the Ducks chances limited, and walked away with an impressive 6-2 victory to get back in the win column. Carter Hart picks up his eighth straight win matching the rookie record set by Jocelyn Thibault, and their point streak now reaches 10 games and they sit seven points out of a playoff spot. Final gameflow/heatmap More From Broad Street Hockey Chatting with Brian Propp and Tim Kerr on player and organizational relations in the NHL Flyers recall Justin Bailey from Lehigh Valley Phantoms BSH Radio #199: Bryce Harper!! (for the clicks) Tuesday Morning Fly By: Oh man we are still talking \u2018yoffs How long until we see Joel Farabee in a Flyers uniform? 5 things we learned from extending the point streak to 5 games Most Read Tuesday Morning Fly By: Oh man we are still talking \u2018yoffs Today\u2019s open discussion thread, complete with your daily dose of Flyers news and notes\u2026 How long until we see Joel Farabee in a Flyers uniform? Isaac Ratcliffe and Tanner Laczynski also rip off impressive weeks. Flyers recall Justin Bailey from Lehigh Valley Phantoms Moves, baby! 5 things we learned from extending the point streak to 5 games The Flyers actually beat good goaltending, what a time to be alive! Chatting with Brian Propp and Tim Kerr on player and organizational relations in the NHL Hey, the Flyers are pretty good at this! Find Tickets Wed Mar 6 Washington Capitals @ Philadelphia Flyers 7:30 PM - Wells Fargo Center - Philadelphia, PA 1,562 tickets available Mon Mar 11 Ottawa Senators @ Philadelphia Flyers 7:00 PM - Wells Fargo Center - Philadelphia, PA 2,509 tickets available See Full Schedule From our sponsor Stubhub Logo This Article has a component height of 56. The sidebar size is long. Loading comments... Chorus FanPosts FanShots Masthead Community Guidelines Facebook Twitter YouTube Horizontal - White Contact Have a News Tip? Browse Blogs About SBN Company Blog Blog Openings Editorial Ethics and Guidelines Vox Media Terms of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Policy GDPR Commitment Communications Preferences Advertise with us Jobs @ Vox Media All Systems Operational Check out our status page for more details. \u00a9 2019 Vox Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved Sports data \u00a9 STATS 2018 tweet share", "21 Savage arrested by ICE in Atlanta | 11alive.com LIVE 41 Atlanta, GA Atlanta Weather Summary: 41 degrees Menu Exact phrase WXIA Alert Center Live Video BreakingNews Weather Delays/Closings Sponsored by Home News Local Money Entertainment Nation World Health Politics Life Community The Investigators Weather & Traffic Current Weather Radar Maps Hourly & 10-Day Closings & Delays Closings Admin Weather Cameras Wizometer Submit Pics StormTrackers Traffic Commuter Dude Travel Driving Smart Gas Prices Sports Latest Sports Super Bowl LIII AJC Peachtree Road Race High School Falcons Braves ATL United Hawks Georgia Bulldogs College Shows Atlanta & Company Atlanta Biz Morning Rush TV Listings Features 11Alive and Well At the Border Black History Brave Conquers Fear Canathon Cold Cases Companies That Care Crime DEALBOSS DIY Education Food Gone Cold Hero Central Holding the Powerful Accountable Kids Who Care Magnify Money Missing in Georgia Mothers Matter My Cumming News My East Point News My Lawrenceville News Real Men Wear Gowns Safety First Senior Source Shop The A-Scene The Hunt The Reveal Verify Vote Why Guy Year in Review Media Video Photos Connect About Advertise with Us Contact Us RSS Feeds Meet the Team Newsletter Jobs Your Take \u00a9 2019 WXIA-TV. All Rights Reserved. Weather Alert 48 Weather Alerts SUPERBOWL Rapper 21 Savage arrested by ICE in Atlanta The agency claims his visa to the United States expired years earlier. Author: Christopher Buchanan, Lauren Padgett Published: 3:47 PM EST February 3, 2019 Updated: 11:42 PM EST February 4, 2019 ATLANTA \u2014 Rapper 21 Savage, who has strong ties to Atlanta, has been arrested by Immigration and Customs Enforcement for overstaying his visa.She'yaa Bin Abraham-Joseph, who performs under the moniker 21 Savage, allegedly entered the U.S. legally in July 2005 but failed to leave under the terms of his \"nonimmigrant visa\" when it expired in 2006, according to ICE spokesperson Bryan Cox. More News Next Story Not Available Just For You Not Available Trending Not Available Though listed on many sites and bios as an Atlanta native, Cox said the rapper is actually a British citizen.The rapper, who has long claimed Atlanta as his home, was targeted during an operation that included both federal and local law enforcement partners in metro Atlanta, Cox said. The legal firm Kuck Baxter Immigration released a statement\u00a0on behalf of 21 Savage on Twitter Monday afternoon.\"ICE detained She'yaa Bin Abraham-Joseph, the well-known Atlanta based recording artist and songwriter also know as \"21 Savage.\" Based upon incorrect information about prior criminal charges and now refusing to release him on bond of any amount, despite the fact that he has a pending U-Visa application (as the victim of a crime) with USCIS, and that he has relief from removal available to him,\" the statement read. \"Mr. Abraham-Joseph has never hid his immigration status from the U.S. government. The Department of Homeland Security has known his address and his history since his filing for the U Visa in 2017, yet they took no action against him until this past weekend. ICE can only continue to detain individuals who are a threat to the community or a flight risk to not not show up at their hearings.\"Obviously, our client is not a flight risk, as he is widely recognizable, and a prominent member of the music industry. Likewise, Mr. Abraham-Joseph's is clearly not a danger to the community, and in fact, his contributions to local communities and schools he grew up in are examples of the type of immigrant we want in America. \"ICE has not charged Mr. Abraham-Joseph with any crime. As a minor, his family overstayed their work visas, and he, like almost two million other children, were left without legal status through no fault of their own. This is a civil law violation, and the continued detention of Mr. Abraham-Joseph serves no other purpose than to unnecessarily punish him and try to intimidate him into giving up his right to fight to remain in the United States. He rose above the difficult circumstances of his youth to achieve success and make contributions to our society that rival any of those by a natural born citizen. \"Mr. Abraham-Joseph has US citizen children that he supports and is eligible for relief from deportation. We and he will fight for his release, for his family, and his right to remain in our country. No one would expect less from him.\" In addition to being in violation of federal immigration law, ICE said 21 Savage was convicted on felony drug charges in 2014 in Atlanta. However, his attorney said there was no drug conviction.\u00a0In the incident report from 2014 obtained by 11Alive, Atlanta police officers were patrolling Boulevard NE at Pine St. NE when they observed a vehicle with the driver side headlight out making an illegal turn. Joseph was in the passenger seat and gave police his name but did not have a driver's license or any other identification.\u00a0K9 officers searched the vehicle and the police dog alerted officers to marijuana in the trunk. A mason jar containing 22.6 grams of marijuana was recovered, along with two loaded pistols that were hidden under the carpet inside the vehicle. An unmarked bottle with 89 Hydrocodone tablets were discovered, along with a scale that was in the middle console in \"plain view,\" according to the Atlanta Police report. Joseph and the driver of the vehicle were both arrested and charged with possession to distribute marijuana and Hydrocodone and transported to Fulton County Jail.\u00a0The rapper is now being held in ICE custody and faces removal proceedings in a federal immigration court.The rapper performed at the Bud Light Super Bowl Music Fest on Jan. 31 and is up for two Grammys in the next week - one for \"Rockstar\" recorded alongside Post Malone. Photos: Rapper 21 Savage LOS ANGELES, CA - FEBRUARY 17: 21 Savage performs onstage at adidas Creates 747 Warehouse St. - an event in basketball culture on February 17, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Neilson Barnard/Getty Images for adidas) DECATUR, GA - AUGUST 05: Recording Artist 21 Savage attends 21 Savage And His Leading By Example Foundation Host 3rd Annual Issa Back 2 School Drive on August 5, 2018 in Decatur, Georgia. (Photo by Moses Robinson/Getty Images for Leading By Example Foundation) US rapper 21 Savage attends the 2018 MTV Video Music Awards at Radio City Music Hall on August 20, 2018 in New York City. (Photo by ANGELA WEISS / AFP) (Photo credit should read ANGELA WEISS/AFP/Getty Images) ATLANTA, GA - JANUARY 31: 21 Savage performs onstage during Bud Light Super Bowl Music Fest / EA SPORTS BOWL at State Farm Arena on January 31, 2019 in Atlanta, Georgia. (Photo by Kevin Winter/Getty Images for Bud Light Super Bowl Music Fest / EA SPORTS BOWL) US rappers 21 Savage (C) and Post Malone (R) hold their award for song of the year at the 2018 MTV Video Music Awards at Radio City Music Hall on August 20, 2018 in New York City. (Photo by ANGELA WEISS / AFP) (Photo credit should read ANGELA WEISS/AFP/Getty Images) BURBANK, CA - JANUARY 22: (L-R) Quavo, Offset, 21 Savage, and Takeoff perform onstage at iHeartRadio album release party with Migos presented by MAGNUM Large Size Condoms at iHeartRadio Theater on January 22, 2018 in Burbank, California. (Photo by Charley Gallay/Getty Images for iHeartMedia) NEW YORK, NY - SEPTEMBER 06: 21 savage poses backstage for the Jeremy Scott show during New York Fashion Week: The Shows at Gallery I at Spring Studios on September 6, 2018 in New York City. (Photo by Theo Wargo/Getty Images for NYFW: The Shows) NEW YORK, NY - SEPTEMBER 07: 21 Savage attends as Harper's BAZAAR Celebrates \"ICONS By Carine Roitfeld\" at the Plaza Hotel on September 7, 2018 in New York City. (Photo by Bryan Bedder/Getty Images for Harper's Bazaar) NEW YORK, NEW YORK - DECEMBER 02: 21 Savage attends the the Versace fall 2019 fashion show at the American Stock Exchange Building in lower Manhattan on December 02, 2018 in New York City. (Photo by Roy Rochlin/Getty Images) BROOKLYN, NY - NOVEMBER 05: 21 Savage attends the CFDA / Vogue Fashion Fund 15th Anniversary Event at Brooklyn Navy Yard on November 5, 2018 in Brooklyn, New York. (Photo by Roy Rochlin/Getty Images) LOS ANGELES, CA - FEBRUARY 17: 21 Savage performs onstage at adidas Creates 747 Warehouse St. - an event in basketball culture on February 17, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Neilson Barnard/Getty Images for adidas) 01 / 11 LOS ANGELES, CA - FEBRUARY 17: 21 Savage performs onstage at adidas Creates 747 Warehouse St. - an event in basketball culture on February 17, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Neilson Barnard/Getty Images for adidas) 02 / 11 DECATUR, GA - AUGUST 05: Recording Artist 21 Savage attends 21 Savage And His Leading By Example Foundation Host 3rd Annual Issa Back 2 School Drive on August 5, 2018 in Decatur, Georgia. (Photo by Moses Robinson/Getty Images for Leading By Example Foundation) 03 / 11 US rapper 21 Savage attends the 2018 MTV Video Music Awards at Radio City Music Hall on August 20, 2018 in New York City. (Photo by ANGELA WEISS / AFP) (Photo credit should read ANGELA WEISS/AFP/Getty Images) 04 / 11 ATLANTA, GA - JANUARY 31: 21 Savage performs onstage during Bud Light Super Bowl Music Fest / EA SPORTS BOWL at State Farm Arena on January 31, 2019 in Atlanta, Georgia. (Photo by Kevin Winter/Getty Images for Bud Light Super Bowl Music Fest / EA SPORTS BOWL) 05 / 11 US rappers 21 Savage (C) and Post Malone (R) hold their award for song of the year at the 2018 MTV Video Music Awards at Radio City Music Hall on August 20, 2018 in New York City. (Photo by ANGELA WEISS / AFP) (Photo credit should read ANGELA WEISS/AFP/Getty Images) 06 / 11 BURBANK, CA - JANUARY 22: (L-R) Quavo, Offset, 21 Savage, and Takeoff perform onstage at iHeartRadio album release party with Migos presented by MAGNUM Large Size Condoms at iHeartRadio Theater on January 22, 2018 in Burbank, California. (Photo by Charley Gallay/Getty Images for iHeartMedia) 07 / 11 NEW YORK, NY - SEPTEMBER 06: 21 savage poses backstage for the Jeremy Scott show during New York Fashion Week: The Shows at Gallery I at Spring Studios on September 6, 2018 in New York City. (Photo by Theo Wargo/Getty Images for NYFW: The Shows) 08 / 11 NEW YORK, NY - SEPTEMBER 07: 21 Savage attends as Harper's BAZAAR Celebrates \"ICONS By Carine Roitfeld\" at the Plaza Hotel on September 7, 2018 in New York City. (Photo by Bryan Bedder/Getty Images for Harper's Bazaar) 09 / 11 NEW YORK, NEW YORK - DECEMBER 02: 21 Savage attends the the Versace fall 2019 fashion show at the American Stock Exchange Building in lower Manhattan on December 02, 2018 in New York City. (Photo by Roy Rochlin/Getty Images) 10 / 11 BROOKLYN, NY - NOVEMBER 05: 21 Savage attends the CFDA / Vogue Fashion Fund 15th Anniversary Event at Brooklyn Navy Yard on November 5, 2018 in Brooklyn, New York. (Photo by Roy Rochlin/Getty Images) 11 / 11 LOS ANGELES, CA - FEBRUARY 17: 21 Savage performs onstage at adidas Creates 747 Warehouse St. - an event in basketball culture on February 17, 2018 in Los Angeles, California. (Photo by Neilson Barnard/Getty Images for adidas) Fellow rapper Young Nudy was arrested alongside 21 Savage for unrelated aggravated assault and gang-related charges.\u00a0The rapper, who's real name is Quantavious Thomas, is an Atlanta native and is reportedly related to 21 Savage and Offset, from Migos. He has done several collaborations with both artists and is signed to Quality Control, which also manages 21 Savage and Migos. According to a post on his Instagram, Young Nudy preformed at The Atrium Sunday night in Stone Mountain, alongside Yo Gotti, City Girls and Moneybagg Yo.RELATED: Atlanta rapper Young Nudy arrested when 21 Savage taken into ICE custody Rapper Young Nudy, aka Quantavious Thomas, was arrested in a traffic stop with fellow rapper, 21 Savage. Thomas was arrested on unrelated assault and gang charges. DeKalb County Police \u25baRELATED: 21 Savage | Despite shooting, there was 'a lot of love' at Zone 6 community event\u25baRELATED:\u00a0'Crazy Rich Asians' Atlanta carpet, & 21 Savage gives back Terms of Service Privacy Notice Your California Privacy Notice Ad Choices EEO Public File Report FCC Online Public Inspection File Closed Captioning Procedures \u00a9 2019 WXIA-TV. All Rights Reserved.", "21 Savage Released on Bond Following ICE Incarceration | PEOPLE.com Top Navigation Explore PEOPLE.com PEOPLE.com News Entertainment Royals Lifestyle Oscars Shop Search Close Profile Menu Your Profile Down Triangle Previous Your Profile Newsletters Manage Your Subscription Give a Gift Subscription Premium Subscribe Close Explore PEOPLE.com PEOPLE.com PEOPLE.com Search Explore Previous Explore Find Out How Many Calories Are in All the Girl Scouts Cookies 1 Find Out How Many Calories Are in All the Girl Scouts Cookies Find out which sweets are the most fattening before you down the whole sleeve. Read More Next Who Will Be Godparents to Meghan and Harry's Baby? 2 Who Will Be Godparents to Meghan and Harry's Baby? From a stylist to a tennis legend, see who is on Meghan and Harry's short list. Read More Next Famous Reality Stars on Other Reality Shows 3 Famous Reality Stars on Other Reality Shows Turns out a few of your Bravo faves are seasoned reality TV stars. Read More Next News Previous News See all News Crime Human Interest Politics Frenchman, 71, Attempts to Cross Atlantic Ocean Frenchman, 71, Attempts to Cross Atlantic Ocean Entertainment Previous Entertainment See all Entertainment Celebrity TV Movies Music Country Awards Sports Theater Books PeopleTV Vanderpump Rules Jax Taylor Shares Touching Tribute Vanderpump Rules Jax Taylor Shares Touching Tribute Royals Lifestyle Previous Lifestyle See all Lifestyle Style Fashion Beauty Health Parents Home Real Estate Pets Food Shopping Tech 7 New Athleisure Essentials 7 New Athleisure Essentials Oscars Shop Profile Menu Subscribe this link opens in a new tab Your Profile Down Triangle Previous Your Profile Newsletters Manage Your Subscription Give a Gift Subscription Premium Follow us People.com Music 21 Savage Released on Bond Following ICE Incarceration: 'He Won His Freedom,' Say Lawyers 21 Savage Released on Bond Following ICE Incarceration: 'He Won His Freedom,' Say Lawyers 21 Savage Paras Griffin/Getty \"21 Savage asked us to send a special message to his fans and supporters,\" his lawyers say in a statement shared to Facebook By Jordan Runtagh February 13, 2019 12:50 PM Nine days after being arrested by\u00a0U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, 21 Savage has been granted bond and was released from federal immigration custody on Wednesday. He and his mother were then flown from Fitzgerald, Georgia, near the ICE dentation center, to Dekalb-Peachtree airport. The two landed in Atlanta shortly after his hearing. The 26-year-old rapper, born She\u2019yaa Bin Abraham-Joseph,\u00a0was\u00a0arrested on Feb. 3 by the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement as authorities claimed he is actually a citizen of the United Kingdom and had overstayed his visa. Get push notifications with news, features and more. + Follow Following You'll get the latest updates on this topic in your browser notifications. The news was shared on his behalf by the rapper\u2019s lawyers, Charles H. Kuck, Dina LaPolt and Alex Spiro, in a statement posted to Facebook on Tuesday. \u201cFor the past nine long days, we, on behalf of She\u2019yaa Bin Abraham-Joseph, known to the world as 21 Savage, have been speaking with ICE to both clarify his actual legal standing, his eligibility for bond, and provide evidence of his extraordinary contributions to his community and society,\u201d the message began. \u201cIn the last 24 hours, in the wake of the Grammy Awards at which he was scheduled to attend and perform, we received notice that She\u2019yaa was granted an expedited hearing. Today, 21 Savage was\u00a0granted a release on bond. He won his freedom.\u201d During the 61st Annual Recording Academy gala on Sunday, 21 Savage got a shout out from songwriter Ludwig G\u00f6ransson as he accepted the song of the year Grammy for \u201cThis Is America\u201d on behalf of his cowriter, Childish Gambino (a.k.a. Donald Glover).\u00a0\u201cHe should be here tonight,\u201d said\u00a0G\u00f6ransson. Post Malone\u00a0wore a shirt with the rapper\u2019s stage name on it underneath his jacket during his performance with Red Hot Chili Peppers during the broadcast. The statement from 21 Savage\u2019s lawyers continued by thanking those who had shown their support during his arrest. \u201c21 Savage asked us to send a special message to his fans and supporters \u2014 he says that while he wasn\u2019t present at the Grammy Awards, he was there in spirit and is grateful for the support from around the world and is more than ever, ready to be with his loved ones and continue making music that brings people together.\u201d In conclusion they write, \u201cHe will not forget this ordeal or any of the other fathers, sons, family members, and faceless people, he was locked up with or that remain unjustly incarcerated across the country. And he asks for your hearts and minds to be with them.\u201d RELATED:\u00a0Everything to Know About Rapper 21 Savage, Who Was Arrested by ICE After Reportedly Overstaying Visa 21 Savage has long been hailed as a local act from Atlanta, but according to multiple reports,\u00a0ICE\u00a0claims he is actually a citizen of the United Kingdom and has overstayed his visa. ICE spokesman Brian Cox told\u00a0The Atlanta Journal-Constitution\u00a0that the artist was arrested in a \u201ctargeted operation\u201d early on the morning of Feb. 3. Cox reportedly said the rapper is an \u201cunlawfully present United Kingdom national\u201d who entered the country legally as a teenager in July 2005 on a visa, which expired the following year. \u201cIn addition to being in violation of federal immigration law,\u00a0Mr. Abraham-Joseph was convicted on felony drug charges in October 2014 in Fulton County, Georgia,\u201d an ICE spokesman said in a statement, according to\u00a0Fox 5 Atlanta. \u201cMr. Abraham-Joseph is presently in ICE custody in Georgia and has been placed into removal proceedings before the federal immigration courts. ICE will now await the outcome of his case before a federal immigration judge to determine future actions.\u201d According to CNN reporter Nick Valencia, a spokesman for ICE claimed that the rapper\u2019s \u201cwhole public persona is false.\u201d RELATED: 21 Savage\u2019s Lawyer Slams His Arrest as \u2018Based Upon Incorrect Information\u2019 and Demands His Release On Feb. 5, 21 Savage\u2019s attorney Charles H. Kuck released a statement to PEOPLE, claiming that 21 Savage\u2019s arrest is \u201cbased upon incorrect information about prior criminal charges.\u201d Kuck revealed 21 Savage was being held without bond, \u201cdespite the fact that he has a pending U-Visa application with USCIS, and that he has relief from removal available to him.\u201d Kuck also said \u201cMr. Abraham-Joseph has never hid his immigration status from the US Government.\u201d and claimed that the \u201cDepartment of Homeland Security has known his address and his history since his filing for the U-Visa in 2017.\u201d RELATED: 21 Savage\u2019s Lawyers Say He\u2019s a Dreamer and Address If Rapper Was Targeted for Being Critical of ICE 21 Savage. Bryan Bedder/Getty The rapper\u2019s legal team expounded on his history in an additional statement on Feb. 6, confirming 21 Savage was, in fact, born in Britain. \u201cMr. Abraham-Joseph was born in the United Kingdom. Mr. Abraham-Joseph arrived legally in the United States at the age of 7,\u201d the statement explained. \u201cHe remained in the United States until 2005, when he departed for approximately one month to visit the United Kingdom. He returned to the United States under a valid H-4 visa on July 22, 2005.\u201d An H-4 visa is issued to immediate family members, spouses or children under the age of 21. \u201cMr. Abraham-Joseph has been continuously physically present in the United States for almost 20 years, except for a brief visit abroad. Unfortunately, in 2006 Mr. Abraham-Joseph\u2019s legal status expired through no fault of his own.\u201d RELATED VIDEO:\u00a0Meet the Princeton University Dreamer Facing Fear of Deportation \u201cMr. Abraham-Joseph, like almost two million of his immigrant child peers, was left without immigration status as a young child with no way to fix his immigration status.\u201d His lawyers argued that he should be considered a Dreamer, the name used to describe children who were brought to this country illegally by their parents and were offered visas under the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) immigration policy. His legal team went on to argue 21 Savage \u201chas no criminal convictions or charges under state or federal law and is free to seek relief from removal in immigration court.\u201d \u201cICE provided incorrect information to the press when it claimed he had a criminal conviction.\u201d You May Like Read More Stay in the Know Subscribe to PEOPLE\u2019s newsletters so you never miss out on a must-read story Sign up Now Tags Music News News EDIT POST Shop | PEOPLE.com TVs Laptops Tablets Leather Jackets Liquid Lipstick Jeans Crossbody Bags Curling Irons Nail Polish Booties Shop More Next PEOPLE.com may receive compensation when you click through and purchase from links contained on this website. PEOPLE.com Magazines & More Learn More Subscribe this link opens in a new tab Advertise Sitemap Student Offer this link opens in a new tab Connect Follow Us Subscribe to Our Newsletter Other Meredith Sites Close Other Meredith Sites Allrecipes this link opens in a new tab All People Quilt this link opens in a new tab Better Homes & Gardens this link opens in a new tab Coastal Living this link opens in a new tab Cooking Light this link opens in a new tab Diabetic Living this link opens in a new tab EatingWell this link opens in a new tab Eat This, Not That this link opens in a new tab Entertainment Weekly this link opens in a new tab Extra Crispy this link opens in a new tab Family Circle this link opens in a new tab Fitness Magazine this link opens in a new tab Fit Pregnancy this link opens in a new tab Food & Wine this link opens in a new tab Health this link opens in a new tab Hello Giggles this link opens in a new tab Instyle this link opens in a new tab Kraft Recipes this link opens in a new tab Martha Stewart this link opens in a new tab Midwest Living this link opens in a new tab Martha Stewart Weddings this link opens in a new tab More this link opens in a new tab Myrecipes this link opens in a new tab Mywedding this link opens in a new tab Parents this link opens in a new tab Parenting this link opens in a new tab People this link opens in a new tab People en Espa\u00f1ol this link opens in a new tab Rachael Ray Magazine this link opens in a new tab Real Simple this link opens in a new tab Shape this link opens in a new tab Ser Padres this link opens in a new tab Siempre Mujer this link opens in a new tab Southern Living this link opens in a new tab Traditional Home this link opens in a new tab Travel & Leisure this link opens in a new tab \u00a9 Copyright 2019 Meredith Corporationthis link opens in a new tab. People is a registered trademark of Meredith Corporation All Rights Reserved. People may receive compensation for some links to products and services on this website. Offers may be subject to change without notice | Privacy policythis link opens in a new tab | Terms of Servicethis link opens in a new tab | Ad Choicesthis link opens in a new tab | Your California Privacy Rightsthis link opens in a new tab | Manage Push Notifications | EU Data Subject Requeststhis link opens in a new tab Manage Push Notifications If you have opted in for our browser push notifications, and you would like to opt-out, please refer to the following instructions depending on your device and browser. For turning notifications on or off on Google Chrome and Android click here, for Firefox click here, for Safari click here and for Microsoft's Edge click here. Ok this link is to an external site that may or may not meet accessibility guidelines.", "Immigrant children detained: Infants as young as five months old are being detained by ICE, groups claims - CBS News News US World Politics Entertainment Health MoneyWatch SciTech Crime Sports Shows CBS This Morning CBS Evening News 60 Minutes Face The Nation Sunday Morning 48 Hours CBSN Originals Live LIVE More Latest Video Photos Podcasts In Depth Local Log In Alerts Mobile Shop Live Watch CBSN Live Infants as young as 5 months old are being detained by ICE, groups claim By Kate Smith February 28, 2019 / 5:10 PM / CBS News Advocacy groups say ICE is detaining infants At least nine infants younger than a year old, including one who is just 5 months old, are being held in ICE custody at a rural Texas detention center without care that's legally required. That's what three immigration advocacy groups claimed in a\u00a0letter\u00a0to the Department of Homeland Security's Inspector General and Officer for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties on Thursday afternoon. The groups said there has been \"an alarming increase in the number of infants\" being held in ICE custody, and urged the department to \"intervene immediately\" at the Dilley, Texas, facility.\"We have grave concerns about the lack of specialized medical care available in Dilley for this vulnerable population,\" said the letter from the three groups \u2014 the American Immigration Council, the American Immigration Lawyers Association and the Catholic Immigration Network, Inc.The advocacy groups alleged the infants have been subject to \"lengthy delays in receiving medical attention and lack of appropriate follow-up treatment.\" They said one infant has been detained for over 20 days.\"ICE is required to meet basic standards of care for minor non-citizens in its custody,\" the letter said, citing the Supreme Court case Flores v. Reno. \"It repeatedly has demonstrated an inability to do so.\" The Department of Homeland Security did not immediately respond to an email from CBS News requesting comment on the letter. The department's Office of the Inspector General also not did immediately respond to an email seeking comment.The infants and their mothers are being held at the South Texas Family Residential Center in Dilley, a rural town with a population of less than 4,000 people. The facility is \"located over one hour by car from San Antonio, the nearest major metropolitan center with facilities equipped to provide specialized medical services,\" according to the letter.Some mothers at the detention center have reported that their infants lost weight since arriving at the detention center and \"are not feeding well due to sudden changes in formula,\" according to the letter. Other infants have exhibited behavior and sleep challenges during their ICE detainment, according to their mothers. The complaint also included a letter from Physicians for Human Rights (PHR), a New York-based non-governmental organization.\"PHR expresses grave concern over a reported increase in detained infant children in South Texas Family Residential Center in Dilley, Texas,\" the group wrote in a letter addressed to DHS Secretary Kirstjen Nielsen. \"Given the inherent harms and health risks of child detention, which are exacerbated (sic) in the case of infants and young children, PHR requests that the government exercise its full discretionary authority to secure the release of these families immediately.\" First published on February 28, 2019 / 5:10 PM \u00a9 2019 CBS Interactive Inc. All Rights Reserved. U.S. More U.S. Millions raised for Pittsburgh synagogue shooting victims About $4.4 million will go to those most directly affected by the Oct. 27 attack, including victims' families and two seriously injured congregants 7M ago TripAdvisor defends handling of rape claims at hotels Travel site says it doesn't delete a business when something terrible happens there because it's \"valuable information\" 17M ago Passengers injured after \"extreme\" wind hits cruise ship Norwegian said a sudden, extreme gust of wind caused the ship to list 44M ago Michael Bloomberg says he will not run for president in 2020 The former New York City mayor will be using his resources to instead to launch a campaign on climate change 1H ago Federal budget deficit leaps 77 percent so far for fiscal 2019 As spending keeps rising, tax revenues are sliding, exploding the October to January budget gap 1H ago more in U.S. Politics More Politics Michael Bloomberg says he will not run for president in 2020 The former New York City mayor will be using his resources to instead to launch a campaign on climate change 1H ago McConnell says Trump likely to veto to resolution to end national emergency Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer urged Republicans to vote to overrule the likely veto 1H ago FDA commissioner who sounded alarm on teen vaping submits resignation Gottlieb has submitted his paperwork for resignation, \"but he will be on for at least another month,\" an administration official said 1H ago Apprehensions of migrant families surge along the border \"The system is well beyond capacity and remains at the breaking point,\" Customs and Border Protection commissioner Kevin McAleenan told reporters 1H ago White House refuses Democrats' demand for security clearance records \"We will not concede the Executive's constitutional prerogatives,\" the White House counsel wrote 2H ago more in Politics World More World 3 bombs found near major transport hubs in London Police said smaller bags inside the mailers enclosed the devices that \"appear capable of igniting an initially small fire when opened\" 4H ago Man allegedly faked own death to avoid rape charges Investigators say Kim Gordon's son claimed the man vanished in treacherous waters at California's \"Mortuary Beach\" 6H ago Bugatti sells most expensive car ever made Bugatti sold a new sports car for a record price at the Geneva International Motor Show 6H ago China's new economic growth target is lower but still robust Premier Li Keqiang set the country's 2019 GDP goal at 6 percent to 6.5 percent, still among the world's strongest 9H ago KFC honors a communist hero with a themed outlet in China Fast-food chain's outlets in Hunan province redecorate with images and quotes to celebrate \"Lei Feng Spirit\" 9H ago more in World Entertainment More Entertainment Where were the moms of Michael Jackson's accusers? James Safechuck's and Wade Robson'\u200bs moms are still grappling with their fondness for Jackson and how his star power clouded their judgment as parents 1H ago Jonas Brothers documentary coming to Amazon The documentary promises to be a \"very personal\" look at the brothers 2H ago \"Game of Thrones\" Season 8 trailer is finally here After months of teasers, HBO released the highly-anticipated trailer for the show's final season 2H ago Steven Spielberg wants Netflix ousted from Oscars Director sparks Hollywood debate: Should streaming services be banished the film industry's highest honor? 4H ago Dwyane Wade shocks NBA rookie with a \"surreal\" gift Kevin Huerter used to have Dwyane Wade's sneakers \u2014 now, he's got his jersey 6H ago more in Entertainment SciTech More SciTech Social media influencers may sway kids to eat more junk \"This is the modern-day version of using popular cartoon characters to sell sugary breakfast cereals or juice boxes\" Mar 4 \"Brotopia\" author on slow progress for women in tech Emily Chang, author of \"Brotopia: Breaking up the Boys' Club of Silicon Valley,\" says the disparity is causing bias to be built into products Mar 4 Scientists prove bees can do math A new study finds that honeybees can perform basic arithmetic \u2013 adding or subtracting \u2013 triggered by color cues Mar 3 SpaceX craft pulls off flawless docking with space station SpaceX moves a step closer to launching astronauts on its Crew Dragon spacecraft Mar 3 SpaceX capsule for astronauts blasts off toward space station SpaceX launches unpiloted crew ship on historic test flight Mar 2 more in SciTech Health More Health FDA commissioner who sounded alarm on teen vaping submits resignation Gottlieb has submitted his paperwork for resignation, \"but he will be on for at least another month,\" an administration official said 1H ago Make more room for happiness in your life by decluttering Bestselling author Gretchen Rubin says there's a connection between outer order and inner calm \u2013 \"even a sense of possibility\" 4H ago It costs less than $60 to have a baby in Finland. How? Finland is consistently praised for its low infant and mother mortality rates, paid maternity leave and healthcare and daycare systems 9H ago Where you buy your prescriptions could be costing you thousands A new survey by the U.S. Public Interest Research Group found the same inhaler being sold for $11.99 at one pharmacy cost $1,136 at another 10H ago 2nd man apparently free of AIDS virus after stem cell transplant The procedure has been called dangerous and has failed in other patients; the patient from London hasn't been identified 19H ago more in Health MoneyWatch More MoneyWatch TripAdvisor defends handling of rape claims at hotels Travel site says it doesn't delete a business when something terrible happens there because it's \"valuable information\" 17M ago Federal budget deficit leaps 77 percent so far for fiscal 2019 As spending keeps rising, tax revenues are sliding, exploding the October to January budget gap 1H ago CBD shops are coming to 108 locations across the U.S. Largest owner of malls in U.S. is partnering with cannabidiol company to sell CBD products easing pain and anxiety 1H ago Kohl's shrinking stores find new tenant: Planet Fitness gyms As its biggest department stores get smaller, Kohl's turns to Planet Fitness, Aldi and others to fill unused space 1H ago Moving workers to front line in corporate bankruptcies Toys R Us collapse prompts calls to treat laid-off workers the same as bankers and lawyers in bankruptcy courts 3H ago more in MoneyWatch Crime More Crime Millions raised for Pittsburgh synagogue shooting victims About $4.4 million will go to those most directly affected by the Oct. 27 attack, including victims' families and two seriously injured congregants 7M ago California AG won't charge officers who shot Stephon Clark The state investigation was independent of the probe led by the local district attorney, who also declined to charge 1H ago Why children don't often report sexual abuse It is estimated one in nine girls and one in 53 boys are sexually abused or assaulted by an adult 3H ago Missing Air Force wife feared husband would kill her, affidavit says Friends of Andreen McDonald, concerned when she didn't show up to work or the gym, found blood in her home, document says 3H ago 3 bombs found near major transport hubs in London Police said smaller bags inside the mailers enclosed the devices that \"appear capable of igniting an initially small fire when opened\" 4H ago more in Crime Copyright \u00a9 2019 CBS Interactive Inc. All rights reserved. Privacy Policy Ad Choice Terms of Use Mobile User Agreement About Advertise Closed Captioning CBS News Store Site Map Contact Us Help", "A Crack in the Ice (achievements) - Guild Wars 2 Wiki (GW2W) A Crack in the Ice (achievements) From Guild Wars 2 Wiki Jump to: navigation, search This article is about the achievement category. For the release, see A Crack in the Ice. A Crack in the Ice is an achievement category for achievements earned during the A Crack in the Ice story and within Bitterfrost Frontier A Crack in the Ice (Story Journal) Total achievements: 25 83 \"A Crack in the Ice\" Mastery 21 Prerequisite: A Crack in the Ice Reward: Glacial Gauntlets Box Completed 1/1 Achievements in \"A Crack in the Ice\" 1 Completed 5/5 Achievements in \"A Crack in the Ice\" 2 Completed 10/10 Achievements in \"A Crack in the Ice\" 3 Completed 15/15 Achievements in \"A Crack in the Ice\" 5 Completed 21/21 Achievements in \"A Crack in the Ice\" 10 Beasts Slain Quick 5 Defeat the ice beast in under 5 minutes Reward: Frozen Exotic Weapon Fragment Beat the Ice Beast in Under 5 Minutes 5 Bitterfrost Frontier Insight: Griffin Old Growth 1\u00a0 1 Discover this Maguuma Mastery Insight in Bitterfrost Frontier. 1/1 Mastery Insight 1 Bitterfrost Frontier Insight: The Bitter Cold 1\u00a0 1 Discover this Maguuma Mastery Insight in Bitterfrost Frontier. 1/1 Mastery Insight 1 Bitterfrost Frontier Insight: The Svanir Hive 1\u00a0 1 Discover this Maguuma Mastery Insight in Bitterfrost Frontier. 1/1 Mastery Insight 1 Codex: Kodan 3 Acquire the Koda's Flame skills and speak with a Flamebearer to learn their history. 5/5 Lessons Learned 3 Delicious Desserts 1 Give a little quaggan sweets to annoy its parents. Brought Desserts from the Bitter Cold to the Quaggan Tads of Sorrow's Eclipse 1 Dive Master: Cold Feet 1 Find and use a diving location in The Bitter Cold Used a Diving Location in the Bitter Cold 1 Elixir Cookin' 1 Do what's necessary to make the thaw elixir. Completed the Elixir Cookin' Mission 1 Elixir Recipe 0 Collect all items on the ingredient list for the elixir. Completed the Elixir Recipe Mission 0 Frozen Out 1\u00a0 0 Join Rox and Braham in the ice caverns Completed the Frozen Out Mission 0 Frozen in Ice 0 Infiltrate the Svanir to discover how they survive Jormag's bitter cold. Completed the Frozen in Ice Mission 0 Gift of Aurene 5 Collect the 8 parts to create an Aurene miniature. Reward: Mini Aurene Collected 8/8 Parts 5 Heart, Moxie, and Many Sweaters 5 Survive 20 stacks of Bitter Cold Survived 20 Stacks of Bitter Cold 5 Journey to Bitterfrost Frontier 0 Travel to the Bitterfrost Frontier to find Braham and the abomination for Taimi's sample. Completed the Journey to Bitterfrost Frontier Mission 0 Larva Conservationist 5 Defeat the Unstable Abomination while inflicting a minimum of mayhem on the surrounding larvae. Reward: Magic-Warped Bundle Defeat the Unstable Abomination with Two or More Larvae Groups Alive 5 New in Box 5 Deliver a bundle of toys to the Priory arcanist. Delivered Toys to the Priory Arcanist 5 Playing Chicken 1 Push a chicken to its limits. Title: Chicken Chaser Beaten by an Apoplectic Chicken 1 Precocious Aurene 0 Train Aurene to be a well-behaved young dragon. Completed the Precocious Aurene Quest 0 Quirky Quaggan Quest 1\u00a0 5 Find all seven stanzas of the quaggan epic poem. 7/7 Stanzas Obtained 5 Stay Unfrosty 5 Battle the ice beast without being frozen. Reward: Magic-Warped Packet Withstood the Ice Beast Without Being Frozen 5 The Bitter Cold 0 Enter the Bitter Cold, and then find and kill the abomination for Taimi's sample. Completed the Bitter Cold Mission 0 Thorough Sampling 7 Find each of the special chests hidden around Bitterfrost Frontier. Reward: 3 Frozen Exotic Weapon Fragment 1/1 Special Chests found in Bitterfrost Frontier 1 5/5 Special Chests found in Bitterfrost Frontier 1 10/10 Special Chests found in Bitterfrost Frontier 1 15/15 Special Chests found in Bitterfrost Frontier 1 19/19 Special Chests found in Bitterfrost Frontier 3 Vigilant 5 Get all the wounded Vigil to safety without having to revive any of them Reward: 2 Frozen Exotic Weapon Fragment Saved All the Vigil 5 Cultural Attach\u00e9 5 Bring Aurene souvenirs from around Tyria to teach her about the cultures of the world. Collected 7/7 Souvenirs 5 Notes[edit] Anomaly: Delicious Desserts are not acquired in the bitter cold despite the achievements description, you get them at the heart in the southeast. Bug: Heart, Moxie, and Many Sweaters does not require the player to be alive when they have 20 stacks of Bitter Cold. Bitter Cold accumulates even when defeated, so simply being in a Bitter Cold area long enough will grant the achievement. There are several Diving Goggles placed around the Bitter Cold area. All of them are placed above solid ice. For Dive Master: Cold Feet to be successful, you must use the highest one, in the southeastern corner of the area. This one will allow you to safely break through the ice to the water below; aim for the obvious patch of ice. There is also an Icebound Chest in the water below the dive point. Using any of the other dive points will result in the ice not breaking and you taking falling damage. Several collections components can can be bought and sold on the Trading Post. The Gift of Aurene collection - Each part can only be crafted once per day per account, on the standard daily reset. The parts are tradable, but the complete doll is account-bound. The Koda's Blessing collection - Both the Offering Basket and complete Offering to Koda items are tradable. Trivia[edit] The \"Playing Chicken\" achievement is likely a reference to The Legend of Zelda series, in which the protagonist struggles with aggressive chickens. Achievements Daily Daily Daily Lunar New Year Daily Fractals Daily Thunderhead Peaks Daily Jahai Bluffs Daily Domain of Kourna Sunken Treasure Hunter Daily Daily Sandswept Isles Daily Domain of Istan Daily Siren's Landing Daily Draconis Mons Daily Lake Doric Daily Bitterfrost Frontier Daily Ember Bay Daily Bloodstone Fen Festivals Lunar New Year New Year's Customs Dragon Ball Story Journal All or Nothing A Star to Guide Us Long Live the Lich A Bug in the System Daybreak Path of Fire: Act 3 Path of Fire: Act 2 Path of Fire: Act 1 One Path Ends Flashpoint The Head of the Snake A Crack in the Ice Rising Flames Out of the Shadows Heart of Thorns: Act 4 Heart of Thorns: Act 3 Heart of Thorns: Act 2 Heart of Thorns: Act 1 Point of No Return Seeds of Truth Tangled Paths Echoes of the Past The Dragon's Reach, Part 2 The Dragon's Reach, Part 1 Entanglement Gates of Maguuma General Dungeons Twilight Arbor Aetherpath The Silverwastes Dry Top Slayer Hero Tradesman Explorer Fashion Weapon Master Community Hall of Monuments Jumping Puzzles Mastery Insights The Shatterer Triple Trouble Tequatl Bosses Sunken Treasure Hunter Path of Fire Crystal Oasis Desert Highlands Elon Riverlands The Desolation Domain of Vabbi Crystal Desert Mastery Insights Specializations Heart of Thorns Verdant Brink Auric Basin Tangled Depths Dragon's Stand Mastery Insights Specializations Side Stories Current Events Roller Beetle Racing Conservation of Magic Justice of the Blade Anomalous Occurrences Transfer Chaser Knight of the Thorn Competitive Eternal Coliseum Forest of Niflhel Legacy of Foefire Revenge of the Capricorn Battle of Kyhlo Temple of the Silent Storm Battle of Champion's Dusk Spirit Watch Skyhammer Year of the Ascension Part I Year of the Ascension Part II Year of the Ascension Part III Year of the Ascension Part IV PvP Conqueror World vs World Edge of the Mists Sanctum Sprint Crab Toss Keg Brawl Southsun Survival Belcher's Bluff Fractals Nightmare Fractal Shattered Observatory Fractal Fractals of the Mists Raids Spirit Vale Salvation Pass Stronghold of the Faithful Bastion of the Penitent Hall of Chains Mythwright Gambit Collections Basic Collections Rare Collections Specialization Collections Legendary Weapons Legendary Backpacks Legendary Armor Legendary Trinkets Black Lion Collections See also: Historical achievements Retrieved from \"https://wiki.guildwars2.com/index.php?title=A_Crack_in_the_Ice_(achievements)&oldid=1854657\" Categories: AnomaliesBugsAchievementsHeart of Thorns contentLiving World Season 3 contentA Crack in the Ice Navigation menu Views Page Discussion Edit History Personal tools Not logged in Talk Contributions Create account Log in Navigation Main page Quick links Community portal Recent changes Random page Search Wiki support Help center How to help Admin noticeboard Report a wiki bug Other languages Tools What links here Related changes Special pages Printable version Permanent link Page information Transclusion list Browse properties Other languages Deutsch Espa\u00f1ol Fran\u00e7ais This page was last edited on 20 February 2019, at 20:24. Content is available under these licensing terms unless otherwise noted. Privacy policy About Guild Wars 2 Wiki Disclaimers", "In first start for Flyers, goalie Cam Talbot will make NHL history Skip to content Tuesday, March 05, 2019|Today's Paper Subscribe Log In MyAccount Manage my account My profile FAQ Log out Your Day Newsletters Philly.com Store Weather Horoscope Lottery Events People Births Celebrations Engagements Obituaries Death Notices Marketplace Find a Home Job Listings Print Offers Special Sections All Classifieds Get In Touch Advertise Contact Us Newsroom Staff Permissions Reprints News New Jersey Pennsylvania Politics Nation & World Education Sports Eagles Phillies Sixers Flyers Union College Sports Rally High School Sports Business Jobs PhillyDeals Small Business Cars Health & Pharma Consumer Opinion Columnists Commentary Editorials Cartoons Entertainment Things To Do Arts & Culture Movies Television Comics Puzzles Life Sex & Love Families Style Identity Home Travel Things To Do at the Shore Food Health Real Estate News Sports Business Opinion Politics Entertainment Life Food Health Real Estate Obituaries Jobs Subscribe Log In Manage my account My profile FAQ Log out Your Day Newsletters Philly.com Store Weather Horoscope Lottery Events People Births Celebrations Engagements Obituaries Death Notices Marketplace Find a Home Job Listings Print Offers Special Sections All Classifieds Get In Touch Advertise Contact Us Newsroom Staff Permissions Reprints News New Jersey Pennsylvania Politics Nation & World Education Sports Eagles Phillies Sixers Flyers Union College Sports Rally High School Sports Business Jobs PhillyDeals Small Business Cars Health & Pharma Consumer Opinion Columnists Commentary Editorials Cartoons Entertainment Things To Do Arts & Culture Movies Television Comics Puzzles Life Sex & Love Families Style Identity Home Travel Things To Do at the Shore Food Health Real Estate In first start for Flyers, goalie Cam Talbot will make NHL history by Sam Donnellon, Updated:\u00a0February 28, 2019 Cam Talbot hasn't played since he joined the Flyers on Feb. 15. AP COLUMBUS, Ohio -- In 2016-17, Cam Talbot set the Edmonton Oilers record for most wins by a goaltender with 42, passing Grant Fuhr. The year before, he tied an international tournament record for shutouts with four. Related stories How Wayne Simmonds affected the Flyers | Marcus Hayes New Flyer Ryan Hartman arrives with a bang in win over Sabres | Sam Donnellon Desperate Flyers looking for first win in four tries against Blue Jackets this season On Friday against New Jersey, Talbot will be part of another mark, becoming the eighth goaltender used by the Flyers, an NHL record. \u201cI don\u2019t know if it\u2019s something you really want to be a part of as a goalie or not,\u201d he said after the morning skate before the Flyers met the Blue Jackets Thursday. \u201cBut here we are.\u201d Traded from Edmonton for Anthony Stolarz on Feb. 15, Talbot has not started a game since Feb. 9. With Carter Hart still sidelined with a sprained ankle and Brian Elliott not far removed from returning from his long injury, Talbot was an obvious choice for Flyers interim coach Scott Gordon. \u201cObviously we had to get him on the ice for some practice time, and at this time of the year there\u2019s not a whole lot,\u201d said Gordon. \u201cAnd we don\u2019t want to go back to back with our goalies as much as we can. So it\u2019s an opportunity for him to get in and play.\u201d By the time Talbot left the ice during Thursday morning\u2019s optional skate, literally every one of his teammates had left the building. With visa problems delaying his arrival and a helter-skelter schedule that included fanfare around the stadium game, he has not had much practice time with his new team. And that\u2019s just practice. The mental sharpness is something most goalies, if not all, agree comes only from playing games. \u201cYou just have to approach it in practice the same way as you do in a game,\" Talbot said. \"Like when we\u2019re doing power-play, penalty-kill stuff like that, don\u2019t try and cut corners. Make the reads you would make in a game. Focus on your tracking, focus on your reads. Any drills that are somewhat game-like.\u201d Talbot has some experience in this, backing up iron man Henrik Lundqvist in New York, stepping in spectacularly during the 2014-15 season after Lundqvist ruptured a blood vessel in his neck. Talbot went 17-4-3 and finished with a lower goals-against average (2.21) and higher save percentage (.926) than Lundqvist. He played himself right off the team in fact, traded at season\u2019s end to Edmonton for three high draft picks, and ultimately earning a three-year, $12 million contract with the Oilers midway through the following season. That contract expires at the end of this season. Talbot is hoping he gets a new one with the Flyers as Carter Hart\u2019s backup. His audition begins Friday. \"You always want to get that first game in with a new team, so I\u2019m looking forward to that,\" he said. Breakaways The Flyers didn\u2019t add a big name at the trade deadline. But the deadline did loosely mark the return of Corban Knight, a Scott Gordon favorite at Lehigh Valley. \u201cFor me, when he was playing for us down at Lehigh he did everything,\u201d said the interim coach. \u201cWhether it was wing, center, power play, penalty kill. He was usually the guy, if somebody wasn\u2019t going, you\u2019d put them with him. Responsible defensively all the time. Not just in the defensive zone but in the offensive zone. He\u2019s very conscientious with the decisions he makes with the puck. He\u2019s a pretty quiet addition we\u2019re making at the trade deadline that not a lot of people know about. But I\u2019ve had him for two years and I know the level of consistency he brings.\u201d Posted:\u00a0February 28, 2019 - 2:16 PM Sam Donnellon | @samdonnellon | donnels@phillynews.com Newsletters: Inquirer Sports Daily The biggest stories for Philly\u2019s biggest sports fans Sign Up Inquirer Sports Daily Never Miss a Story Subscribe We Recommend Brian Elliott\u2019s revival has aided Flyers\u2019 surge Sam Carchidi Flyers RW Jake Voracek will miss Wednesday\u2019s game; Nolan Patrick might play vs. Capitals Sam Carchidi Flyers need a healthy Jake Voracek to complete unprecedented run to a playoff berth Sam Carchidi Flyers-Islanders observations: Are Isles the team to play in the first round? Sam Donnellon With trade deadline behind him, versatile Michael Raffl breathes sigh of relief Sam Donnellon Flyers continue unlikely playoff march, beat Islanders 4-1 Sam Donnellon Newsletters: Inquirer Sports Daily The biggest stories for Philly\u2019s biggest sports fans Sign Up Inquirer Sports Daily Never Miss a Story Subscribe twitter facebook instagram News & Info News / Sports / Entertainment / Business / Health / Food / Life / Opinion / Archives About Us About Philly.com / Advertise / Contact Us / Licensing & Permissions / Photo Reprints / Newspapers in Education / Jobs & Internships / Special Reports / Acel Moore Workshops / Newsroom Staff Marketplace Inquirer Store / Find a Home / Job Listings / Special Sections / All Classifieds Mobile Apps Philly News / Philly Sports Now News & Info News Sports Entertainment Business Health Food Life Opinion Archives Marketplace Inquirer Store Find a Home Job Listings Special Sections All Classifieds Mobile Apps Philly News Philly Sports Now About Us About Philly.com Advertise Contact Us Licensing & Permissions Photo Reprints Newspapers in Education Jobs & Internships Special Reports Acel Moore Workshops Newsroom Staff The Inquirer Digital Edition Subscribe Subscriber Services The Daily News Digital Edition Subscribe Subscriber Services The Inquirer Digital Edition Subscribe Subscriber Services The Daily News Digital Edition Subscribe Subscriber Services \u00a9 Copyright 2019, Philadelphia Media Network (Digital), LLC Terms of Use/Privacy Policy \u00a9 Copyright 2019, Philadelphia Media Network (Digital), LLC Terms of Use/Privacy Policy", "aggradational ice | SpringerLink Skip to main content Skip to table of contents This service is more advanced with JavaScript available, learn more at http://activatejavascript.org SpringerLink Search SpringerLink Search Home Log in Dictionary Geotechnical Engineering/W\u00f6rterbuch GeoTechnik 2014 Edition Contents Search aggradational iceReference work entryFirst Online: 24 August 2014DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-41714-6_10974 14 Downloads How to citeaggradational ice \u25cf Bodenzuwachseis n [Der durch das Ansteigen der Permafrosttafel oder das Absenken der Permafrostbasis entstandene Bodeneiszuwachs]Copyright information\u00a9\u00a0Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg\u00a02014 How to cite Cite this entry as: (2014) aggradational ice. In: Dictionary Geotechnical Engineering/W\u00f6rterbuch GeoTechnik. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg .RIS Papers Reference Manager RefWorks Zotero .ENW EndNote .BIB BibTeX JabRef Mendeley About this entry First Online 24 August 2014 DOI https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-41714-6 Publisher Name Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg Print ISBN 978-3-642-41713-9 Online ISBN 978-3-642-41714-6 eBook Packages Earth and Environmental Science Buy this book on publisher's site Reprints and Permissions Search book Search within book Type for suggestions Table of contents Previous Page 49 Navigate to page number of 3379 Next About this reference work Introduction Bibliographic information A agglomerate agglomerate agglomerate lava agglomerate tuff agglomerating agglomeration agglomeration process agglomeration test agglutinate cone agglutinating agglutinating value agglutination aggradation aggradation\u2026 aggradational ice aggradational plain to aggrade aggraded aggraded valley plain aggrading Over 10 million scientific documents at your fingertips Switch Edition Academic Edition Corporate Edition Home Impressum Legal information Privacy statement How we use cookies Accessibility Contact us Springer Nature \u00a9 2018 Springer Nature Switzerland AG. Part of Springer Nature. Not logged in Not affiliated 75.166.229.92", "U.S. seizes record 3,800 pounds of meth intended for AustraliaNewsNightly NewsMeet the PressDatelineMSNBCTODAYSearchSponsored ByPoliticsU.S. NewsBusinessWorldTech & MediaTHINKSportsShare this \u2014Crime & CourtsU.S. seizes record 3,800 pounds of meth intended for AustraliaAuthorities said the seizure would have a noticeable impact on the worldwide meth market.Methamphetamine seized last month at the Los Anglers/Long Beach seaport in Southern California.Australian Federal PoliceBreaking News EmailsGet breaking news alerts and special reports. The news and stories that matter, delivered weekday mornings.SUBSCRIBEFeb. 8, 2019, 6:34 AM GMT\u00a0/ Updated\u00a0Feb. 8, 2019, 9:04 AM GMTBy Alex JohnsonLOS ANGELES \u2014 Six people were arrested in Australia on Thursday and Friday after U.S. investigators intercepted almost two tons of methamphetamine and other narcotics in Southern California bound for Australia, authorities in both countries said. It's believed to be the largest seizure of meth in U.S. history.U.S. Customs and Border Protection said in a statement that the drugs, packed in three containers and concealed in what were labeled as loudspeakers, were intercepted at the Los Angeles/Long Beach seaport on Jan. 11.The U.S. Department of Homeland Security and Australian Federal Police said two U.S. citizens and four Australian citizens were arrested on Thursday and Friday Australian time in the Australian states of Victoria and New South Wales.Australian authorities said charges included possession and attempted importation of a commercial quantity of border-controlled drugs. They said search warrants were also executed in Canada, where investigators seized \"a significant quantity of suspected proceeds of crime.\"The 3,800 pounds of methamphetamine was concealed in containers designed to look like loudspeakers, U.S. and Australian authorities said.Australian Federal PoliceAuthorities in both countries said it was the largest meth seizure in U.S. history \u2014 more than 3,800 pounds of methamphetamine, with an estimated street value of almost $1.3 billion Australian (about $900 million U.S.), as well as about 55 pounds of cocaine and about 11 pounds of heroin.The meth alone would equal about 85 percent of all of the meth consumed in Victoria, Australia's second-most populous state, in the course of an entire year, according to figures provided by Jason Halls, the manager of Victoria operations for the Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission.The seizure \"will have a huge effect on the illicit drug market,\u201d Halls said.The investigation, dubbed Operation Hoth (the site of a Rebel base in the \"Star Wars\" movies), began when the Victorian Joint Organized Crime Task Force alerted special agents in DHS's Homeland Security Investigations division about a planned large-scale importation of drugs by a drug smuggling group in California, Australian police said.The investigation eventually expanded to include the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration; the Coast Guard; Los Angeles, Long Beach and Los Angeles port police; and the Los Angeles and Orange County sheriff's departments, CBP said.\"By stopping this, we have ensured criminals will not profit from the immense pain these drugs would have caused our community,\" said Bruce Hill, the Australian Federal Police's assistant commissioner for organized crime.\u201cIf this shipment had made Australian streets it equates to something like 17 million hits of ice. We have averted a tsunami of ice to Australia.\"\"This is a serious warning. We now believe that Mexican cartels are actively targeting Australia.\"Chief Superintendent Keith Finn, head of the Federal Serious and Organized Crime Unit of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police in British Columbia, said the interception was large enough to put a noticeable dent in the meth market worldwide.\"A seizure such as this not only helps protect the country to which the shipment was destined but has a positive impact on the international market as a whole,\" Finn said.Andrew Blankstein contributed.AboutContactCareersPrivacy policyTerms of ServiceSiteMapAdvertiseAdChoices\u00a9 2019 NBC UNIVERSAL", "Arctic sea ice decline - Wikipedia Arctic sea ice decline From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search The sea ice loss observed in recent decades in the Arctic Ocean September 2, 2012 \u2014 two weeks later, the record lowest minimum occurred: 3,410,000 square kilometres (1,320,000\u00a0sq\u00a0mi)Play mediaJanuary 1, 2013 through September 10, 2016, the latter date being when the sea ice reached its annual minimum extentSatellite views of Arctic sea ice. Every year, Arctic sea ice grows and extends through the winter. On March 7, 2017, Arctic sea ice reached its record lowest maximum. Arctic sea ice extent as of February 3, 2016. January Arctic sea ice extent was the lowest in the satellite record. credit: NSIDC. Arctic sea ice extent anomaly. Play media This video shows how the quantity of older and thicker ice has changed between 1984 and 2016. Arctic sea ice decline refers to the sea ice loss observed in recent decades in the Arctic Ocean. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Fourth Assessment Report states that greenhouse gas forcing is predominantly responsible for the decline in Arctic sea ice extent. A study from 2011 suggested that internal variability enhanced the greenhouse gas forced sea ice decline over the last decades.[1] A study from 2007 found the decline to be \"faster than forecasted\" by model simulations.[2] The IPCC Fifth Assessment Report concluded, with high confidence, that sea ice will continue to decrease in extent, and that there is robust evidence for the downward trend in Arctic summer sea ice extent since 1979.[3] It has been established that the region is at its warmest for at least 40,000 years and the Arctic-wide melt season has lengthened at a rate of 5 days per decade (from 1979 to 2013), dominated by a later autumn freeze-up.[4] Sea ice changes have been identified as a mechanism for polar amplification.[5] Contents 1 Definitions 2 Observation 2.1 Satellite era 3 Ice-free summer 4 Tipping point 5 Implications 5.1 Amplified Arctic warming 5.2 Polar vortex disruption 5.3 Atmospheric chemistry 5.4 Atmospheric regime 5.5 Plant and animal life 5.6 Shipping 5.7 Human Impact 6 See also 7 References 8 External links 8.1 Maps 8.2 Video Definitions[edit] The Arctic Ocean is the mass of water positioned approximately above latitude 65\u00b0 N. Arctic Sea Ice refers to the area of the Arctic Ocean covered by ice. The Arctic sea ice minimum is the day in a given year when Arctic sea ice reaches its smallest extent, occurring at the end of the summer melting season, normally during September. Arctic Sea ice maximum is the day of a year when Arctic sea ice reaches its largest extent near the end of the Arctic cold season, normally during March.[6] Typical data visualizations for Arctic sea ice include average monthly measurements or graphs for the annual minimum or maximum extent, as shown in the adjacent images. Observation[edit] Main article: Measurement of sea ice Play media An animation of the annual Arctic sea ice minimum with a graph overlay showing the area of the minimum sea ice in millions of square kilometres. An article in Popular Mechanics, published in March 1912, described open waters in the Arctic regions in 1911, a year with exceptional above average temperatures.[7] Satellite era[edit] 2018 sea ice extent visualization. Observation with satellites show that Arctic sea ice area, extent, and volume have been in decline for a few decades. Sometime during the 21st century, sea ice may effectively cease to exist during the summer. Sea ice extent is defined as the area with at least 15% ice cover.[8] The amount of multi-year sea ice in the Arctic has declined considerably in recent decades. In 1988, ice that was at least 4 years old accounted for 26% of the Arctic's sea ice. By 2013, ice that age was only 7% of all Arctic sea ice.[9] Scientists recently measured sixteen-foot (five-meter) wave heights during a storm in the Beaufort Sea in mid-August until late October 2012. This is a new phenomenon for the region, since a permanent sea ice cover normally prevents wave formation. Wave action breaks up sea ice, and thus could become a feedback mechanism, driving sea ice decline.[10] For January 2016, the satellite based data showed the lowest overall Arctic sea ice extent of any January since records begun in 1979. Bob Henson from Wunderground noted: Hand in hand with the skimpy ice cover, temperatures across the Arctic have been extraordinarily warm for midwinter. Just before New Year\u2019s, a slug of mild air pushed temperatures above freezing to within 200 miles of the North Pole. That warm pulse quickly dissipated, but it was followed by a series of intense North Atlantic cyclones that sent very mild air poleward, in tandem with a strongly negative Arctic oscillation during the first three weeks of the month.[11] The January 2016's remarkable phase transition of Arctic oscillation was driven by a rapid tropospheric warming in the Arctic, a pattern that appears to have increased surpassing the so-called stratospheric sudden warming.[12] The previous record of the lowest area of the Arctic Ocean covered by ice in 2012 saw a low of 1.58 million square miles (4.1 million square kilometers). This replaced the previous record set on September 28, 2007 at 1.61\u00a0million miles (2.59\u00a0million kilometers).[13] Ice-free summer[edit] The dark ocean surface reflects only 6 percent of incoming solar radiation, instead sea ice reflects 50 to 70 percent.[14] As ice melts, the liquid water collects in depressions on the surface and deepens them, forming these melt ponds in the Arctic. These fresh water ponds are separated from the salty sea below and around it, until breaks in the ice merge the two. An \"ice-free\" Arctic Ocean is often defined as \"having less than 1 million square kilometers of sea ice\", because it is very difficult to melt the thick ice around the Canadian Arctic Archipelago.[15][16][17] The IPCC AR5 defines \"nearly ice-free conditions\" as sea ice extent less than 106\u00a0km2 for at least five consecutive years.[3] Many scientists have attempted to estimate when the Arctic will be \"ice-free\". Professor Peter Wadhams of the University of Cambridge is among these scientists.[18] Wadhams and several others have noted that climate model predictions have been overly conservative regarding sea ice decline.[2][19] A 2013 paper suggested that models commonly underestimate the solar radiation absorption characteristics of wildfire soot.[20] A 2006 paper predicted \"near ice-free September conditions by 2040\".[21] Overland and Wang (2013) investigated three different ways of predicting future sea ice levels. From sea ice models and recent satellite images it can be expected that a sea ice free summer will come before 2020.[22] The IPCC AR5 (for at least one scenario) estimates an ice-free summer might occur around 2050.[3] The Third U.S. National Climate Assessment (NCA), released May 6, 2014, reports that the Arctic Ocean is expected to be ice free in summer before mid-century. Models that best match historical trends project a nearly ice-free Arctic in the summer by the 2030s.[23] However, these models do tend to underestimate the rate of sea ice loss since 2007. Based on the outcomes of several different models, Overland and Wang (2013) put the early limit for a sea ice free summer Arctic near 2040.[22] Monthly averages from 1979 - 2017. Data source via the Polar Science Center (University of Washington). Data visualisation by Andy Lee Robinson. Warming Arctic temperatures provide a powerful forcing toward lessened sea ice coverage[24] Tipping point[edit] There is an ongoing debate if the Arctic Ocean has already passed a \"tipping point\", defined as a threshold for abrupt and irreversible change. A 2013 study identified an abrupt transition to increased seasonal ice cover variability in 2007, which has persisted in following years. The researchers made a distinction between a bifurcation and a non-bifurcation 'tipping point'.[25] The IPCC AR5 report stated with medium confidence that precise levels of climate change sufficient to trigger a tipping point remain uncertain, and that the risk associated with crossing multiple tippingpoints increases with rising temperature.[26] Implications[edit] See also: Climate change feedback Map illustrating various Arctic shipping routes Amplified Arctic warming[edit] Dark, open water left behind as sea ice melts absorbs vastly more heat than ice covered water, leading to physical implications that include the ice-albedo feedback or warmer sea surface temperatures which increase ocean heat content. As Peter Wadhams, a polar researcher writes \"once summer ice yields to open water, the albedo\u00a0... drops from 0.6 to 0.1, which will further accelerate warming of the Arctic and of the whole planet.\"[27] This warming has increased to such an extent that the poles are heating approximately twice as fast as the global average, according to Rutgers University climate scientist Jennifer Francis.[28] Economical implications of ice free summers and the decline in Arctic ice volumes include a greater number of journeys across the Arctic Ocean Shipping lanes during the year. This number has grown from 0, in 1979 to 400\u2013500 along the Bering strait and >40 along the Northern Sea Route, in 2013.[29] Polar vortex disruption[edit] The polar vortex is a whirlwind of especially cold, dense air forming near the poles that is contained by the jet stream, a belt of fast-flowing winds that serves as a boundary between cold polar air and the warmer air of other hemispheres. Because the power of the polar vortex and jet stream is derived partly from the temperature contrast between cold polar air and warmer tropical air, it is at risk of becoming severely diminished as this contrast is eroded by the effects of melting sea ice.[28] According to the Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences \"there [has been] a significant change in the vortex mean state over the twenty-first century, resulting in a weaker, more disturbed vortex.\"[30] As the vortex becomes weaker, it is more likely to allow cold arctic air to escape from the confines of the jet stream and spill over into other hemispheres.[28] This disruption has already begun to affect global temperatures. In a 2017 study conducted by climatologist Dr. Judah Cohen and several of his research associates, Cohen wrote that \"[the] shift in polar vortex states can account for most of the recent winter cooling trends over Eurasian midlatitudes\".[31] Atmospheric chemistry[edit] See also: Arctic methane release Melting of sea ice releases molecular chlorine, which reacts with sunlight to produce chlorine atoms. Because chlorine atoms are highly reactive, they can expedite the degradation of methane and tropospheric ozone and the oxidation of mercury to more toxic forms.[32] Cracks in sea ice are causing ozone and mercury uptake in the surrounding environment.[33] A 2015 study concluded that Arctic sea ice decline accelerates methane emissions from the Arctic tundra. One of the study researchers noted, \"The expectation is that with further sea ice decline, temperatures in the Arctic will continue to rise, and so will methane emissions from northern wetlands.\"[34] Atmospheric regime[edit] See also: Polar amplification Play media Influence of Arctic sea ice on European summer precipitation. A link has been proposed between reduced Barents-Kara sea ice and cold winter extremes over northern continents.[35] Model simulation suggest diminished Arctic sea ice may have been a contributing driver of recent wet summers over northern Europe, because of a weakened jet stream, which dives further south.[36] Extreme summer weather in northern mid-latitudes has been linked to a vanishing cryosphere.[37] Evidence suggest that the continued loss of Arctic sea-ice and snow cover may influence weather at lower latitudes. Correlations have been identified between high-latitude cryosphere changes, hemispheric wind patterns and mid-latitude extreme weather events for the Northern Hemisphere.[38] A study from 2004, connected the disappearing sea ice with a reduction of available water in the American west.[39] Based on effects of Arctic amplification (warming) and ice loss, a study in 2015 concluded that highly amplified jet-stream patterns are occurring more frequently in the past two decades, and that such patterns can not be tied to certain seasons. Additionally it was found that these jet-stream patterns often lead to persistent weather patterns that result in extreme weather events. Hence, continued heat trapping emissions favour increased formation of extreme events caused by prolonged weather conditions.[40] In 2018, climate scientist Michael E. Mann explained that the west Antarctic ice sheet may lose twice as much ice by the end of the century as previously thought, which also doubles the projected rise in sea level from three feet to more than six feet.[41] Play media This animation shows the difference in the area, volume and depth of the average September Arctic sea ice between 1979 and 2013. Plant and animal life[edit] See also: Polar bear \u00a7\u00a0Climate change Sea ice decline has been linked to boreal forest decline in North America and is assumed to culminate with an intensifying wildfire regime in this region.[42] The annual net primary production of the Eastern Bering Sea was enhanced by 40\u201350% through phytoplankton blooms during warm years of early sea ice retreat.[43] Polar bears are turning to alternative food sources because Arctic sea ice melts earlier and freezes later each year. As a result, they have less time to hunt their historically preferred prey of seal pups, and must spend more time on land and hunt other animals.[44] As a result, the diet is less nutritional, which leads to reduced body size and reproduction, thus indicating population decline in polar bears.[45] Shipping[edit] Melting Arctic ice caps are likely to increase traffic through the Arctic Ocean.[46][47] An early study by James Hansen and colleagues suggested in 1981 that a warming of 5 to 10\u00a0\u00b0C, which they expected as the range of Arctic temperature change corresponding to doubled CO2 concentrations, could open the Northwest Passage.[48] A 2016 study concludes that Arctic warming and sea ice decline will lead to \"remarkable shifts in trade flows between Asia and Europe, diversion of trade within Europe, heavy shipping traffic in the Arctic and a substantial drop in Suez traffic. Projected shifts in trade also imply substantial pressure on an already threatened Arctic ecosystem.\"[49] In August 2017, the first ship traversed the Northern Sea Route without the use of ice-breakers.[50] Also in 2017, the Finnish icebreaker MSV Nordica, set a record for the earliest crossing of the Northwest Passage.[51] According to the New York Times, this forebodes more shipping through the Arctic, as the sea ice melts and makes shipping easier.[50] A 2016 report by the Copenhagen Business School found that large-scale trans-Arctic shipping will become economically viable by 2040.[52][50] Human Impact[edit] The decline of arctic sea ice will provide humans with access to previously remote coastal zones. As a result, this will lead to an undesirable effect on terrestrial ecosystems and increase the risk of marine species survival. [53] See also[edit] Abrupt climate change Arctic sea ice ecology and history Effects of global warming on humans Measurement of sea ice Polar vortex Sea ice thickness Vanishing Point (2012 film) Soil carbon feedback References[edit] ^ Jennifer E. Kay, Marika M. Holland & Alexandra Jahn (August 22, 2011). \"Inter-annual to multi-decadal Arctic sea ice extent trends in a warming world\". Geophysical Research Letters. 38 (15): L15708. Bibcode:2011GeoRL..3815708K. doi:10.1029/2011GL048008.CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link) ^ a b Stroeve, J.; Holland, M. M.; Meier, W.; Scambos, T.; Serreze, M. (2007). \"Arctic sea ice decline: Faster than forecast\". Geophysical Research Letters. 34 (9): L09501. Bibcode:2007GeoRL..3409501S. doi:10.1029/2007GL029703. ^ a b c IPCC AR5 WG1 (2013). \"The Physical Science Basis\" (PDF). ^ J. C. Stroeve; T. Markus; L. Boisvert; J. Miller; A. Barrett (2014). \"Changes in Arctic melt season and implications for sea ice loss\". Geophysical Research Letters. 41 (4): 1216\u20131225. Bibcode:2014GeoRL..41.1216S. doi:10.1002/2013GL058951. ^ Kwang-Yul Kim1, Benjamin D. Hamlington2, Hanna Na3, and Jinju Kim1. \"Mechanism of seasonal Arctic sea ice evolution and Arctic amplification\". The Cryosphere.CS1 maint: Multiple names: authors list (link) ^ NSIDC. \"Quick Facts on Arctic Sea Ice\". Retrieved 15 May 2015. ^ Francis Molena (1912). Remarkable Weather of 1911. Popular Mechanics. ^ \"Daily Updated Time series of Arctic sea ice area and extent derived from SSMI data provided by NERSC\". Archived from the original on 10 September 2013. Retrieved 14 September 2013. ^ Watch 27 years of 'old' Arctic ice melt away in seconds The Guardian 21 February 2014 ^ Hannah Hickey (July 29, 2014). \"Huge waves measured for first time in Arctic Ocean\". University of Washington. ^ \"Absurd January Warmth in Arctic Brings Record-Low Sea Ice Extent\". Wunderground. 2016. ^ Wang, S.-Y. S., Y.-H. Lin, M.-Y. Lee, J.-H. Yoon, J. D. D. Meyer, and P. J. Rasch (2017), Accelerated increase in the Arctic tropospheric warming events surpassing stratospheric warming events during winter, Geophys. Res. Lett., 44, doi:10.1002/2017GL073012. ^ \"Arctic Sea Ice Hits Record Low\u2014Extreme Weather to Come?\". 2016-08-29. Retrieved 2016-11-29. ^ \"Thermodynamics: Albedo\". NSIDC. ^ Hu, Yongyun; Horton, Radley M.; Song, Mirong; Liu, Jiping (2013-07-10). \"Reducing spread in climate model projections of a September ice-free Arctic\". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences: 201219716. doi:10.1073/pnas.1219716110. ISSN\u00a00027-8424. PMID\u00a023858431. ^ \"Study predicts an ice-free Arctic by the 2050s\". Phys.org. August 8, 2013. ^ Hu, Yongyun; Horton, Radley M.; Song, Mirong; Liu, Jiping (2013-07-30). \"Reducing spread in climate model projections of a September ice-free Arctic\". Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 110 (31): 12571\u201312576. doi:10.1073/pnas.1219716110. ISSN\u00a00027-8424. PMID\u00a023858431. ^ Wadhams, Peter (20 June 2015). \"Our time is running out \u2013 The Arctic sea ice is going!\". www.youtube.com. Retrieved 29 November 2016. ^ Overland, J. E.; Wang, M. (2013). \"When will the summer Arctic be nearly sea ice free?\". Geophysical Research Letters. 40 (10): 2097. Bibcode:2013GeoRL..40.2097O. doi:10.1002/grl.50316. ^ China, Swarup; Claudio, Mazzoleni; Gorkowski, Kyle; Aiken, Allison; Dubey, Manvendra (2013). \"Morphology and mixing state of individual freshly emitted wildfire carbonaceous particles\". Nat. Commun. 4: 2122. Bibcode:2013NatCo...4E2122C. doi:10.1038/ncomms3122. PMC\u00a03715871. PMID\u00a023824042. ^ Holland, M. M.; Bitz, C. M.; Tremblay, B. (2006). \"Future abrupt reductions in the summer Arctic sea ice\". Geophysical Research Letters. 33 (23): L23503. Bibcode:2006GeoRL..3323503H. doi:10.1029/2006GL028024. ^ a b Overland, James E. (21 May 2013). \"When will the summer Arctic be nearly sea ice free?\". Geophysical Research Letters. 40 (10): 2097\u20132101. Bibcode:2013GeoRL..40.2097O. doi:10.1002/grl.50316. ^ \"Melting Ice Key Message Third National Climate Assessment\". National Climate Assessment. Retrieved 25 June 2014. ^ Comiso, J.C., Parkinson, C.L., Gersten, R. and Stock, L., 2008. Accelerated decline in the Arctic sea ice. Geophysical research letters, 35(1). ^ Valerie N. Livina, Timothy M. Lenton (2013). \"A recent tipping point in the Arctic sea-ice cover: abrupt and persistent increase in the seasonal cycle since 2007\". The Cryosphere. 7 (1): 275\u2013286. arXiv:1204.5445. Bibcode:2013TCry....7..275L. doi:10.5194/tc-7-275-2013.CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link) ^ IPCC AR5 WGII (2014). \"Climate change 2014, Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability\" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-05-14. ^ Wadhams, Peter (2016). A Farewell To Ice. UK: Penguin. p.\u00a04. ISBN\u00a09780241009413. ^ a b c \"Polar Vortex: How the Jet Stream and Climate Change Bring on Cold Snaps\". InsideClimate News. 2018-02-02. Retrieved 2018-11-24. ^ Society, National Geographic. \"Interactive Map: The Changing Arctic\". National Geographic. Retrieved 2016-11-29. ^ Mitchell, Daniel M.; Osprey, Scott M.; Gray, Lesley J.; Butchart, Neal; Hardiman, Steven C.; Charlton-Perez, Andrew J.; Watson, Peter (August 2012). \"The Effect of Climate Change on the Variability of the Northern Hemisphere Stratospheric Polar Vortex\". Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences. 69 (8): 2608\u20132618. doi:10.1175/jas-d-12-021.1. ISSN\u00a00022-4928. ^ Kretschmer, Marlene; Coumou, Dim; Agel, Laurie; Barlow, Mathew; Tziperman, Eli; Cohen, Judah (January 2018). \"More-Persistent Weak Stratospheric Polar Vortex States Linked to Cold Extremes\". Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society. 99 (1): 49\u201360. doi:10.1175/bams-d-16-0259.1. ISSN\u00a00003-0007. ^ Jin Liao et al.(2013) (January 2014). \"High levels of molecular chlorine in the Arctic atmosphere\". Nature Geoscience. 7 (2): 91\u201394. Bibcode:2014NatGe...7...91L. doi:10.1038/ngeo2046. ^ Christopher W. Moore; Daniel Obrist; Alexandra Steffen; Ralf M. Staebler; Thomas A. Douglas; Andreas Richter; Son V. Nghiem (January 2014). \"Convective forcing of mercury and ozone in the Arctic boundary layer induced by leads in sea ice\". Nature Letters. 506 (7486): 81\u201384. Bibcode:2014Natur.506...81M. doi:10.1038/nature12924. PMID\u00a024429521. ^ \"Melting Arctic sea ice accelerates methane emissions\". ScienceDaily. 2015. ^ Vladimir Petoukhov; Vladimir A. Semenov (November 2010). \"A link between reduced Barents-Kara sea ice and cold winter extremes over northern continents\". Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres. 115 (21): D21111. Bibcode:2010JGRD..11521111P. doi:10.1029/2009JD013568. ^ J A Screen (November 2013). \"Influence of Arctic sea ice on European summer precipitation\". Environmental Research Letters. 8 (4): 044015. Bibcode:2013ERL.....8d4015S. doi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/4/044015. Retrieved January 26, 2014. ^ Qiuhong Tang; Xuejun Zhang; Jennifer A. Francis (December 2013). \"Extreme summer weather in northern mid-latitudes linked to a vanishing cryosphere\". Nature Climate Change. 4 (1): 45\u201350. Bibcode:2014NatCC...4...45T. doi:10.1038/nclimate2065. Retrieved January 26, 2014. ^ James E. Overland (December 2013). \"Atmospheric science: Long-range linkage\". Nature Climate Change. 4 (1): 11\u201312. Bibcode:2014NatCC...4...11O. doi:10.1038/nclimate2079. ^ Jacob O. Sewall, Lisa Cirbus Sloan (2004). \"Disappearing Arctic sea ice reduces available water in the American west\". Geophysical Research Letters. 31 (6): L06209. Bibcode:2004GeoRL..31.6209S. doi:10.1029/2003GL019133.CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link) ^ Jennifer Francis, Natasa Skific (1 June 2015). \"Evidence linking rapid Arctic warming to mid-latitude weather patterns\". Philosophical Transactions. 373 (2045): 20140170. Bibcode:2015RSPTA.37340170F. doi:10.1098/rsta.2014.0170. PMC\u00a04455715. PMID\u00a026032322.CS1 maint: Uses authors parameter (link) ^ Mann, Michael E. (2018-05-07). \"Climate Scientist Won't Back Down Despite Threats, Harassment\". KQED Science. KQED. Retrieved 27 November 2018. ^ Martin P. Girardin; Xiao Jing Guo; Rogier De Jong; Christophe Kinnard; Pierre Bernier; Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Raulier (December 2013). \"Unusual forest growth decline in boreal North America covaries with the retreat of Arctic sea ice\". Global Change Biology. 20 (3): 851\u2013866. Bibcode:2014GCBio..20..851G. doi:10.1111/gcb.12400. PMID\u00a024115302. ^ Zachary W. Brown; Kevin R. Arrigo (January 2013). \"Sea ice impacts on spring bloom dynamics and net primary production in the Eastern Bering Sea\". Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans. 118 (1): 43\u201362. Bibcode:2013JGRC..118...43B. doi:10.1029/2012JC008034. ^ Elizabeth Peacock; Mitchell K. Taylor; Jeffrey Laake; Ian Stirling (April 2013). \"Population ecology of polar bears in Davis Strait, Canada and Greenland\". The Journal of Wildlife Management. 77 (3): 463\u2013476. doi:10.1002/jwmg.489. ^ Karyn D. Rode; Steven C. Amstrup; Eric V. Regehr (2010). \"Reduced body size and cub recruitment in polar bears associated with sea ice decline\". Ecological Applications. 20 (3): 768\u2013782. doi:10.1890/08-1036.1. ^ Fountain, Henry (2017-07-23). \"With More Ships in the Arctic, Fears of Disaster Rise\". The New York Times. ISSN\u00a00362-4331. Retrieved 2017-07-24. ^ McGrath, Matt (2017-08-24). \"First tanker crosses northern sea route without ice breaker\". BBC News. Retrieved 2017-08-24. ^ Hansen, J.; et al. (1981). \"Climate impact of increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide\". Science. 231 (4511): 957\u2013966. Bibcode:1981Sci...213..957H. doi:10.1126/science.213.4511.957. PMID\u00a017789014. ^ Bekkers, Eddy; Francois, Joseph F.; Rojas-Romagosa, Hugo (2016-12-01). \"Melting Ice Caps and the Economic Impact of Opening the Northern Sea Route\". The Economic Journal. 128 (610): 1095\u20131127. doi:10.1111/ecoj.12460. ISSN\u00a01468-0297. ^ a b c Goldman, Russell (2017-08-25). \"Russian Tanker Completes Arctic Passage Without Aid of Icebreakers\". The New York Times. ISSN\u00a00362-4331. Retrieved 2017-08-26. ^ \"Ship sets record for earliest crossing of notorious Northwest Passage through Arctic\". The Independent. July 30, 2017. ^ \"Arctic shipping \u2013 Commercial opportunities and challenges\" (PDF). ^ Walker, Donald A.; Stirling, Ian; Kutz, Susan J.; Kerby, Jeffrey; Hebblewhite, Mark; Fulton, Tara L.; Brodie, Jedediah F.; Bitz, Cecilia M.; Bhatt, Uma S. (2013-08-02). \"Ecological Consequences of Sea-Ice Decline\". Science. 341 (6145): 519\u2013524. doi:10.1126/science.1235225. ISSN\u00a00036-8075. PMID\u00a023908231. External links[edit] Third National Climate Assessment | Melting Ice NASA Earth Observatory | Arctic Sea Ice Wunderground | Arctic Sea Ice Decline Piecing together the Arctic\u2019s sea ice history back to 1850 How predictable is the first ice-free Arctic summer? Maps[edit] NSIDC | Arctic Sea Ice News Cryosphere Today Daily AMSR2 Sea Ice Maps Video[edit] Annual Arctic sea ice minimum 1979\u20132016 with area graph The Arctic Meltdown & Extreme Weather \u2013 Jennifer Francis (2017) vteArctic topicsHistory Arctic research Exploration of the Arctic History of whaling Government Arctic Council Arctic cooperation and politics Arctic Ocean Conference Chief Directorate of the Northern Sea Route Ilulissat Declaration Inuit Circumpolar Council Saami Council Territorial claims in the Arctic United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea Geography Arctic Circle Arctic ecology Arctic Ocean Arctic Cyclone Arctic geography terminology Greenland ice sheet Impact craters of the Arctic Nordicity North Pole Populated places in the Arctic Tundra Regions Arctic Alaska British Arctic Territories Canadian Arctic Archipelago Finnmark Greenland Northern Canada Northwest Territories Nunavik Nunavut Russian Arctic Sakha S\u00e1pmi Yukon North American Arctic Climate Arctic Climate Impact Assessment Arctic dipole anomaly Arctic oscillation Arctic sea ice decline ecology and history Climate change in the Arctic Climate of Alaska Effects of global warming on marine mammals Polar climate Polar amplification Polar vortex Fauna Arctic fox Beluga whale Bowhead whale Lemming Muskox Narwhal Polar bear Reindeer Seal bearded harp hooded ribbon ringed Snowy owl Walrus Flora Arctic ecology Arctic vegetation Tundra Culture Arctic peoples Subarctic peoples Chukchi Chukotka Evenks Inuit Gwich'in Khanty Koryaks Nenets Northern indigenous Russian peoples Sami Selkup Yakuts Yukaghir Arctic Winter Games Tsagaan Sar (New Year's Day) Economy Natural resources Petroleum exploration Arctic Refuge drilling controversy Protected areas Transportation Transport Arctic Bridge Arctic shipping routes Northeast Passage Northwest Passage Northern Sea Route Polar air route Transpolar Sea Route Search and rescue Category Portal WikiProject Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Arctic_sea_ice_decline&oldid=884652963\" Categories: Climate changeEnvironment of the ArcticForms of waterHydrologySea iceHidden categories: CS1 maint: Uses authors parameterCS1 maint: Multiple names: authors listArticles with short descriptionArticles containing video clips Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces ArticleTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version Languages Espa\u00f1olTi\u1ebfng Vi\u1ec7t\u7cb5\u8a9e Edit links This page was last edited on 23 February 2019, at 01:43\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "Permafrost \u2013 Defined TermNo results found.Add DefinitionNEWLoginPermafrost12 definitionsPermafrostas defined in Meteorology Terminologyby National Oceanic and Atmospheric AdministrationA soil layer below the surface of tundra regions that remains frozen permanently. 70 0 SharePermafrostas defined in Glossary of Wildland Fire Terminologyby National Wildfire Coordinating GroupA short term for \"permanently frozen ground\"; any part of the earth's crust, bedrock, or soil mantle that remains below 32\u00b0 F (0\u00b0 C) continuously for a number of years. 59 0 SharePermafrostas defined in Reclamation Glossaryby U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of ReclamationPerennially frozen soil. 52 0 SharePermafrostas defined in 2015 NAL Glossaryby United States Department of Agriculture, National Agricultural Library\"permafrost\": Permanently frozen ground; generally refers to a layer at some depth below the soil surface. Any layer above it, which thaws in summer, is termed the active layer. 44 0 SharePermafrostas defined in Glossary of Soil Termsby European Commission(i) permanently frozen subsurface material underlying the solum; (ii) perennially frozen soil horizon where temperature remains below 0\u00b0C throughout the year and in which Cryosols form. 52 0 SharePermafrostas defined in Glossaryby National Aeronautics and Space AdministrationNational Aeronautics Space Administration, Earth ObservatoryPerennially frozen ground that occurs wherever the temperature remains below 0\u00b0 C for several years. 64 0 SharePermafrostas defined in Global Change Glossaryby U.S. Global Change Research ProgramGround that remains at or below freezing for at least two consecutive years. 34 0 SharePermafrostas defined in Glossaryby National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Climate Program OfficePerennially frozen ground that occurs wherever the temperature remains below 0\u00ef\u00bf\u00bdC for several years. 48 0 SharePermafrostas defined in Glossaryby U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation ServiceGround, soil, or rock that remains at or below 0 \u00b0C for at least two years. \u00a0It is defined on the basis of temperature and is not necessarily frozen (i.e., cemented by ice). 65 0 SharePermafrostas defined in Glossary of Meteorological Termsby American Meteorological SocietyA layer of soil or bedrock at a variable depth beneath the surface of the earth in which the\u00a0temperature\u00a0has been below\u00a0freezing\u00a0continuously from a few to several thousands of years.Permafrost exists where the summer heating fails to descend to the base of the layer of\u00a0frozen ground. A continuous stratum of permafrost is found where the annual\u00a0mean temperature\u00a0is below about -5\u00b0C (23\u00b0F).\u00a0active layer.As limited in application by P. F. Svetsov, soil that is known to have been frozen for at least a century. 59 0 Share12Loading conversations.About this termPermafrost has been defined 12 different ways in documents like Meteorology Terminology, Glossary of Wildland Fire Terminology, Reclamation Glossary, and 7 more.Similar or Related TermsA dictionary of legal, industry-specific, and uncommon terms.Copyright \u00a9 Defined Term.About UsAboutFAQLegalContactConnectFacebook Twitter Instagram", "Permafrost | Define Permafrost at Dictionary.com Dictionary.comThesaurus.comEverything After ZWord of the DayVideoWord FactsGrammarCrossword SolverDaily CrosswordAll The WordsSlangEmojiGender & SexualityAcronymsDictionary.comThesaurus.comTry Our AppsdefinitionsSearchsynonymspermafrost[pur-muh-frawst, -frost]EXAMPLES|WORD ORIGINSEE MORE SYNONYMS FOR permafrost ON THESAURUS.COMnoun(in arctic or subarctic regions) perennially frozen subsoil.Explore Dictionary.comThe Word Possible Changes HeadlinesCan You Translate These Famous Phrases From Emoji?These Are the Longest Words in EnglishThese Are the Saddest Phrases in EnglishOrigin of permafrostFirst recorded in 1943; perma(nent) + frostAlso called pergelisol.Dictionary.com Unabridged Based on the Random House Unabridged Dictionary, \u00a9 Random House, Inc. 2019Related Words for permafrostchunk, glaze, hail, crystal, iceberg, icicle, glacier, sleet, diamonds, hailstone, floeExamples from the Web for permafrostContemporary Examples of permafrostI wondered what would happen to the trees if some of the permafrost melted, allowing roots to expand in longer growing seasons.Visiting the Arctic Circle\u2026Before It\u2019s Irreversibly ChangedTerry Greene SterlingApril 1, 2014British Dictionary definitions for permafrostpermafrostnounground that is permanently frozen, often to great depths, the surface sometimes thawing in the summerShow MoreWord Origin for permafrostC20: from perma (nent) + frostCollins English Dictionary - Complete & Unabridged 2012 Digital Edition \u00a9 William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd. 1979, 1986 \u00a9 HarperCollins Publishers 1998, 2000, 2003, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2012Word Origin and History for permafrostn.1943, coined in English by Russian-born U.S. geologist Siemon W. Muller (1900-1970) from perm(anent) frost.Show MoreOnline Etymology Dictionary, \u00a9 2010 Douglas Harperpermafrost in Sciencepermafrost[p\u00fbr\u2032m\u0259-fr\u00f4st\u2032]A layer of soil or bedrock that has been continuously frozen for at least two years and as long as tens of thousands of years. Permafrost can reach depths of up to 1,524 m (4,999 ft). It is found throughout most of the polar regions and underlies about one fifth of the Earth's land surface.Show MoreThe American Heritage\u00ae Science Dictionary Copyright \u00a9 2011. Published by Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company. All rights reserved.Others Are ReadingWhat Does Gender Really Mean?The Year's Top Word TrendsWord of the DayvolubleWords We Get Wrong: How Many of These Can You Say?Did You Know Real People Write the Dictionary?Nearby words for permafrostperma-perma-pressperma-tanpermaculturepermadeathpermafrostpermafrost tablepermalinkpermalloypermanencepermanencyBrowse the Dictionary:#ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZBrowse by Category:SlangEmojiAcronymsPop CultureMoreAboutCareersContact UsCookies, Terms, & Privacy\u00a9 2019 Dictionary.com, LLC", "Permafrost Home News Weather Entertainment Sports Money More > Lifestyle Health & Fitness Food & Drink Travel Autos Video Kids entertainment You are using an older browser version. Please use a supported version for the best MSN experience. SETTINGS OFF HD HQ SD LO AFP Permafrost Duration: 01:03 6/10/2015 SHARE SHARE TWEET SHARE EMAIL Scientists have called for action to defuse a time bomb of Arctic greenhouse gas as negotiators at UN talks grappled over a climate rescue pact. About 1,500 billion tonnes of heat-trapping carbon gas are estimated to be locked in permafrost, which is thawing as the climate warms, according to new research.VIDEOGRAPHIC UP NEXT NOW PLAYING: other Permafrost AFP UP NEXT Is shale oil drilling a Ponzi scheme? CNBC Britt Robertson Discusses The Second Season Of \"For the People\" AOL Build How \"For The People\" Has Changed Britt Robertson's Perception Of Current Events AOL Build New \u2018Game of Thrones\u2019 trailer for final season revealed In the Know Matt Forde's \"Disgustingly\" Short Shorts. AOL Build UK Olivia Wilde is hosting a feminist and politically minded podcast, and we're adding it to the rotation Hello Giggles Michael Sheen to Play Serial Killer in Fox Pilot 'Prodigal Son' | THR News The Hollywood Reporter Watch: Every Time the Word \u2018Virgin\u2019 Has Been Said on This Season of \u2018The Bachelor\u2019 US Weekly The Bold and the Beautiful - Don't Stay Here CBS Entertainment \u2018Brooklyn Nine-Nine\u2019: Watch Lin-Manuel Miranda play Amy\u2019s competitive brother Entertainment Weekly \u2018South Park\u2019 Creator Trey Parker Files for Divorce The Blast Step Up (Final Dance Scene) Cosmopolitan Strictly Ballroom (1992): Trailer HQ Cosmopolitan Fence Jump \u2013 The Bachelor Thrillist Game of Thrones Season 8 Official Trailer Orlando Sentinel TV show 'Now Apocalypse' makes debut (FCL Mar. 5) WTLV-TV Jacksonville More From AFP More From AFP Plastics: beauty and the beast AFP 1:39 The spark behind the electric car AFP 1:44 France's Rungis: The biggest fresh product market in the world AFP 1:38 Vaccination AFP 2:19 SpaceX's Crew Dragon heads for the ISS AFP 1:09 Self-driving cars AFP 1:15 India-Pakistan tension AFP 0:32 Pesticides AFP 1:14 Air pollution AFP 1:40 Ocean garbage AFP 1:51 Organic farming in Europe AFP 1:47 Artificial rain AFP 1:19 Fighting forest fires AFP 2:02 The 5G revolution AFP 1:45 Roland-Garros expansion AFP 0:39 Hayabusa2\u2019s rendezvous with asteroid Ryugu AFP 1:18 Home News Weather Entertainment Sports Money Lifestyle Health & Fitness Food & Drink Travel Autos Video Kids", "permafrost | National Geographic Society Who We AreAbout UsOur ExplorersOur HistoryOur LeadershipOur NewsroomWhat We DoProjects Big Cats InitiativeLast Wild PlacesOkavango Wilderness ProjectOut of Eden WalkPhoto ArkPhoto CampPlastics: Source to SeaPristine SeasSumatran Rhino RescueAll Impact ProgramsEducation Classroom ResourcesProfessional DevelopmentStudent ExperiencesBlogGrant ProgramsTechnology and InnovationD.C. Events & ExhibitionsOur ImpactOur AwardsOur BlogGet InvolvedGive to the SocietyAttend an Event or ExhibitionApply for a GrantGet UpdatesFOLLOW USTwitterFacebookGoogle+ Sign In Sign InCreate an AccountDonateEducationClassroom ResourcesResource LibraryMappingExplorer MagazineProfessional DevelopmentOnline CoursesEducator NetworkGrants for EducatorsGrosvenor Teacher FellowshipStudent ExperiencesGeoBeeGeoChallengeExplorer ClassroomStudent MatineesBlogEducationHomeClassroom ResourcesProfessional DevelopmentStudent ExperiencesBlogDonateWho We AreAbout UsOur ExplorersOur HistoryOur LeadershipOur NewsroomWhat We DoProjects HOMEBig Cats InitiativeLast Wild PlacesOkavango Wilderness ProjectOut of Eden WalkPhoto ArkPhoto CampPlastics: Source to SeaPristine SeasSumatran Rhino RescueAll Impact ProgramsEducation HOMEClassroom ResourcesProfessional DevelopmentStudent ExperiencesBlogGrant ProgramsTechnology and InnovationD.C. Events & ExhibitionsOur ImpactOur AwardsOur BlogGet InvolvedGive to the SocietyAttend an Event or ExhibitionApply for a GrantGet UpdatesFOLLOW USsearch Education EducationClassroom ResourcesProfessional DevelopmentStudent ExperiencesBlogsearchHomeNAT GEO SOCIETYWho We AreAbout UsOur ExplorersOur HistoryOur LeadershipOur NewsroomWhat We DoProjects HomeBig Cats InitiativeLast Wild PlacesOkavango Wilderness ProjectOut of Eden WalkPhoto ArkPhoto CampPlastics: Source to SeaPristine SeasSumatran Rhino RescueAll Impact ProgramsEducation HomeClassroom ResourcesProfessional DevelopmentStudent ExperiencesBlogGrant ProgramsTechnology and InnovationD.C. Events & ExhibitionsOur ImpactOur AwardsOur BlogGet InvolvedGive to the SocietyAttend an Event or ExhibitionApply for a GrantGet UpdatesFollow UsDonate Resource Library | Encyclopedic Entry permafrost Encyclopedic entry. Permafrost is a permanently frozen layer below the Earth\u2019s surface. It consists of soil, gravel, and sand, usually bound together by ice.Grades5 - 12, Higher EdSubjectsEarth science, Meteorology, Geography, Physical GeographyContents4 Photographs Twitter Facebook Google+ Google Classroom Email Print Encyclopedic Entry Vocabulary Permafrost is a permanently frozen layer below the Earths surface. It consists of soil, gravel, and sand, usually bound together by ice. Permafrost usually remains at or below 0C (32F) for at least two years. Permafrost can be found on land and below the ocean floor. It is found in areas where temperatures rarely rise above freezing. This means permafrost is often found in Arctic regions such as Greenland, the U.S. state of Alaska, Russia, China, and Eastern Europe. Permafrost thickness can range from 1 meter (3 feet) to more than 1,000 meters (3,281 feet). Permafrost covers approximately 22.8 million square kilometers (8.8 million square miles) in the Earth's Northern Hemisphere. Frozen ground is not always the same as permafrost. A layer of soil that freezes for more than 15 days per year is called \"seasonally frozen ground.\" A layer of soil that freezes between one and 15 days a year is called \"intermittently frozen ground.\" Permafrost is frozen for two years or more.Permafrost does not always form in one solid sheet. There are two major ways to describe its distribution: continuous and discontinuous. Continuous permafrost is just what it sounds like: a continuous sheet of frozen material. Continuous permafrost extends under all surfaces except large bodies of water in the area. The part of Russia known as Siberia has continuous permafrost.Discontinuous permafrost is broken up into separate areas. Some permafrost, in the shadow of a mountain or thick vegetation, stays all year. In other areas of discontinuous permafrost, the summer sun melts the permafrost for several weeks or months. The land near the southern shore of Hudson Bay, Canada, has discontinuous permafrost.Scientists who study permafrost are able to understand changes in the Earth's climate by observing changes in permafrost. Studies show the Earth's permafrost warmed by 6C during the 20th century. Scientists predict widespread melting of permafrost by 2100. Melting permafrost would raise water levels in the Earth's oceans and increase erosion. Erosion happens when permafrost melts because soil and sediment are easily washed away without the ice binding them together. Lakes and marshes in the Arctic are often shallow due to permafrost. Photograph by Mikaela Howie, MyShot Permafrost ArchitectureThough people do live in permafrost regions, such as Siberia, Canada, and Alaska, building on top of permafrost is difficult. Buildings raise the temperature of the ground beneath themwhich can melt permafrost and cause the building to sink in the mud. Engineers have found ways to build on top of permafrost without raising the ground temperature. These methods include building on top of wood piles or on top of thick gravel pads. Term Part of Speech Definition Encyclopedic Entry approximately Adjective generally or near an exact figure. Arctic Noun region at Earth's extreme north, encompassed by the Arctic Circle. Encyclopedic Entry: Arctic climate Noun all weather conditions for a given location over a period of time. Encyclopedic Entry: climate continuous permafrost Noun layer of soil that is permanently frozen. discontinuous permafrost Noun frozen layer of soil that thaws during the summer. erosion Noun act in which earth is worn away, often by water, wind, or ice. Encyclopedic Entry: erosion freezing Adjective at or below 0 degrees Celsius (32 degrees Fahrenheit). gravel Noun small stones or pebbles. ice Noun water in its solid form. Encyclopedic Entry: ice intermittently frozen ground Noun earth that freezes between one and fifteen days a year. mountain Noun landmass that forms as tectonic plates interact with each other. Northern Hemisphere Noun half of the Earth between the North Pole and the Equator. permafrost Noun permanently frozen layer of the Earth's surface. Encyclopedic Entry: permafrost sand Noun small, loose grains of disintegrated rocks. seasonally frozen ground Noun earth that freezes more than fifteen days a year, but less than two continuous years. sediment Noun solid material transported and deposited by water, ice, and wind. Encyclopedic Entry: sediment shadow Noun dark area where an object prevents light from reaching a surface. Siberia Noun region of land stretching across Russia from the Ural Mountains to the Pacific Ocean. soil Noun top layer of the Earth's surface where plants can grow. temperature Noun degree of hotness or coldness measured by a thermometer with a numerical scale. Encyclopedic Entry: temperature vegetation Noun all the plant life of a specific place. Articles & Profiles National Geographic News: Thawing Permafrost Could Supercharge Warming Websites International Permafrost Association: Find Out More About Permafrost Credits Media Credits The audio, illustrations, photos, and videos are credited beneath the media asset, except for promotional images, which generally link to another page that contains the media credit. The Rights Holder for media is the person or group credited. Writers Kim Rutledge Melissa McDaniel Diane Boudreau Tara Ramroop Santani Teng Erin Sprout Hilary Costa Hilary Hall Jeff Hunt Illustrators Tim Gunther Mary Crooks, National Geographic Society Editors Kara West Jeannie Evers, Emdash Editing Educator Reviewer Nancy Wynne Producer Caryl-Sue, National Geographic Society Sources Dunn, Margery G. (Editor). (1989, 1993). \"Exploring Your World: The Adventure of Geography.\" Washington, D.C.: National Geographic Society. Last Updated Feb. 15, 2011 User Permissions For information on user permissions, please read our Terms of Service. If you have questions about licensing content on this page, please contact ngimagecollection@natgeo.com for more information and to obtain a license. If you have questions about how to cite anything on our website in your project or classroom presentation, please visit our FAQ page. Media Some media assets (videos, photos, audio recordings and PDFs) can be downloaded and used outside the National Geographic website according to the Terms of Service. If a media asset is downloadable, a download button appears in the lower right hand corner () of the media viewer. If no button appears, you cannot download or save the media. Text Text on this page is printable and can be used according to our Terms of Service. Interactives Any interactives on this page can only be played while you are visiting our website. You cannot download interactives. Related Materials Key Concepts ice temperature arctic Northern Hemisphere soil permafrost Encyclopedia Quick FindA\u00a0B\u00a0C\u00a0D\u00a0E\u00a0F\u00a0G\u00a0H\u00a0I\u00a0J\u00a0K\u00a0L\u00a0M\u00a0N\u00a0O\u00a0P\u00a0Q\u00a0R\u00a0S\u00a0T\u00a0U\u00a0V\u00a0W\u00a0X\u00a0Y\u00a0Z Glossary Quick FindA\u00a0B\u00a0C\u00a0D\u00a0E\u00a0F\u00a0G\u00a0H\u00a0I\u00a0J\u00a0K\u00a0L\u00a0M\u00a0N\u00a0O\u00a0P\u00a0Q\u00a0R\u00a0S\u00a0T\u00a0U\u00a0V\u00a0W\u00a0X\u00a0Y\u00a0Z #Go to the Full Glossary \u00bb National Geographic Headquarters 1145 17th Street NW Washington, D.C. 20036 Connect About Us Newsroom Contact Us Careers at NGS Visit Our Museum Privacy Policy Sustainability Policy Terms of Service Code of Ethics Donate Get Updates Donate Get Updates Connect National Geographic Society is a 501 (c)(3) organization. \u00a9 1996 - 2019 National Geographic Society. All rights reserved. See our stories at NationalGeographic.com", "frozen ground or permafrost | National Snow and Ice Data Center Skip to main content National Snow and Ice Data Center Home Data Data Sets for Research Brightness Temperature Glaciers Ice Sheets Permafrost Sea Ice Soil Moisture Snow ...search for more Scientific Data Search Support for Researchers Analysis & Imaging Tools Data Announcements Submit Your Data Data Policies User Support Data for Everyone Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Glacier Photograph Collection Greenland Ice Sheet Today MASIE (Daily sea ice extent) Satellite Observations of Arctic Change Sea Ice Index Virtual Globes: Google Earth Sponsored Programs Antarctic Glaciological Data Center Exchange for Local Observations and Knowledge of the Arctic (ELOKA) NOAA at NSIDC NASA Distributed Active Archive Center at NSIDC (NSIDC DAAC) Looking for facts and information? See About the Cryosphere. Research Scientists Research Grants Scientific Publications Informatics Research NSIDC Scientific Expeditions On Thin Ice: Expedition to a Crumbling Ice Shelf Scientists blog from Antarctica and provide a glimpse of what it's like to do research in the field. Read their blog ... News For the Media Newsroom: For the Media For Data Users Data Announcements The Drift Current Conditions Arctic Sea Ice News & Analysis Greenland Today Satellite Observations of Arctic Change NSIDC In the News Events NSIDC Monthly Highlights Icelights: Answers to your burning questions about ice and climate What's hot in the news around climate and sea ice and what are scientists talking about now? Read more... About About NSIDC NSIDC People Our Sponsors Jobs NSIDC Monthly Highlights Use & Copyright Contact Us Support NSIDC NSIDC's Green Data Center About the Cryosphere Quick Facts All About The Cryosphere All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Frozen Ground All About Sea Ice All About Arctic Climatology & Meteorology Snow, Ice and Climate Change Studying the Cryosphere Photo Gallery Educational Resources Cryosphere Glossary What is the Cryosphere? When scientists talk about the cryosphere, they mean the places on Earth where water is in its solid form, frozen into ice or snow. Read more ... Web pagesData Sets Cryosphere Glossary - Choose a Topic - climatology and meteorology freshwater ice frozen ground or permafrost glaciers icebergs and ice shelves ice sheets sea ice snow frozen ground or permafrost 5 February 2018Scientists find massive reserves of mercury hidden in permafrostThe finding has significant implications for human health and ecosystems worldwide. thaw basina depression of the permafrost table created by naturally induced thawing. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost suscitic cryogenic fabrica distinct soil micromorphology, resulting from the effects of freezing and thawing processes, in which coarser soil particles have vertical or near-vertical orientation. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost surface thawing indexthe cumulative number of degree-days above 0\u00b0C for the surface temperature (of the ground, pavement, etc.) during a given period. Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost yedomaA type of Pleistocene-age (formed 1.8 million to 10,000 years before present) permafrost that contains a significant amount of organic material with ice content of 50\u0096 to 90 percent by volume. Thawing yedoma is a significant source of atmospheric methane. A yedoma in Russia shows the thick layer of ice and carbon material exposed along this body of water. --Credit: Vladimir Romanovsky Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost zone of gas-hydrate stabilitythat portion of the subsurface where the conditions of temperature and pressure are suitable for the formation and preservation of gas hydrates.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost zero curtainthe persistence of a nearly constant temperature, very close to the freezing point, during annual freezing (and occasionally during thawing) of the active layer.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost Young's Modulusthe ratio of increase in stress acting on a test specimen, to the resulting increase in strain, under constant transverse stress.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost well-bonded permafrostice-bearing permafrost in which all the soil particles are held together by ice.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost wedge iceice occurring in an ice wedge.Topic:\u00a0frozen ground or permafrost Pages1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 \u2026 next \u203a last \u00bb Find Data Search NSIDC Data NASA Earthdata Search IceBridge Portal Data Collections List Stay Current Arctic Sea Ice News and Analysis Sea Ice Index (Passive microwave satellite data) MASIE (Daily sea ice extent, multi-source) Greenland Today Newsroom Learn About Snow and Ice Icelights: Answers to Your Questions Cryosphere Quick Facts All About Glaciers All About Snow All About Sea Ice Arctic Climatology - A Primer Get Help Knowledge Base Etc. Use & Copyright Web Policy Jobs Home | Contact Us\u00a9 2019, National Snow and Ice Data Center :: Advancing knowledge of Earth's frozen regions", "Multi-Language Glossary Available Online - Permafrost and Related Ground Ice Terms | ARCUS Skip to main content HomeAboutValues, Vision, and MissionStaffBoard of DirectorsAdvisory CouncilServicesContactARCUS LogoEmployment OpportunitiesDonatePrivacy PolicyMembershipMember InformationARCUS MembersMember RepresentativesOrganizational Member ApplicationAnnual MeetingsProgramsStudy of Environmental Arctic ChangeSea Ice Prediction NetworkSea Ice OutlookSea Ice for Walrus OutlookIndigenous ScholarsExternal Collaborations for the Interagency Arctic Research Policy CommitteePolarTRECThe Arctic in the ClassroomLogisticsArctic System Science ProgramBering Ecosystem ScienceJoint Science Education Project (JSEP)MeetingsARCUS at POLAR2018Women's Perspectives Luncheon at Polar2018Research Seminar SeriesAlaska Marine Science Symposium 2018AGU Community MeetingsARCUS Annual MeetingsArctic Research DayArctic Science Summit Week 2017USArray Sustainability Workshop2016 NPS SymposiumARCUS at Arctic Circle 2016Arctic Science Ministerial Side-EventArctic Science Summit Week 2016Sea Ice Prediction Network MeetingsPast MeetingsAlaska Marine Science Symposium 20162013 Logistics WorkshopState of the Arctic2011 Southwest Alaska Park Science SymposiumNorthern Oil and Gas ForumNPS Park Science in the ArcticUSFWS WildREACHCalendarUpcoming EventsSearch EventsSubmit EventPast EventsResourcesArctic System Synthesis ReportArcticInfoSubmissionPast Announcement SearchAboutWitness the ArcticWitness Community HighlightsDirectory of Arctic ResearchersSearch the DirectoryPublications DirectoryNews ArchiveConducting Research with Northern CommunitiesArctic Visiting SpeakersPolar Education ListPurchase ItemsARCUS Archive SiteDonateARCUS Membership DonationGiving to ARCUSDonor Levels Search form Search Multi-Language Glossary Available Online - Permafrost and Related Ground Ice Terms Date:\u00a016 June 2005Multi-Language Glossary Available Online Permafrost and Related Ground Ice Terms National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC) The glossary is available at: http://nsidc.org/fgdc/glossary ----------------------------------------------- During the 5th International Permafrost Conference, held in Trondheim (Norway) in August 1988, the Council of the International Permafrost Association (IPA) authorized the establishment of a Terminology Working Group with the mandate \"to develop a set of internationally accepted permafrost terms for use in engineering and science, with equivalents in various languages, and to disseminate and encourage the use of such terminology.\" The Terminology Working Group included members from Argentina, Canada, China, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Norway, Sweden, the USA, and the (former) USSR, and they published a hard copy version of the Glossary in 1998. The glossary, edited by Robert O. van Everdingen, included detailed illustrations and terms in Chinese, English, French, German, Icelandic, Italian, Norwegian, Polish, Romanian, Russian, Spanish and Swedish. Electronic versions of the English version of the 1998 Glossary without illustrations was published on the Circumpolar Active-layer Permafrost System (CAPS) CD-ROMs (versions 1.0 and 2.0), but until now the illustrations and multi-language terms were only available in the limited paper publication. Now, thanks to the continued work of Dr. van Everdingen, the full, illustrated, multi-language version of the glossary is available at: http://nsidc.org/fgdc/glossary The references and English definitions are available in HTML and PDF formats. The introduction, illustrations, and multi-language terms are available in PDF format. Please contact NSIDC User Services with any questions: CIRES, 449 UCB University of Colorado Boulder, CO 80309-0449 USA Phone: 303-492-6199 Fax: 303-492-2468 E-mail: nsidc@nsidc.org URL: http://nsidc.org ArcticInfo About Submission Subscribe Past Announcement Search Arctic Research Consortium of the United States 3535 College Road Suite 101 Fairbanks, Alaska 99709-3710 907-474-1600 info@arcus.org ARCUS is a nonprofit organization consisting of institutions organized and operated for educational, professional, or scientific purposes to advance arctic research and education. This website is supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Cooperative Agreement No. PLR-1304316. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. AboutValues, Vision, and Mission Staff Board of Directors Advisory Council Services Contact ARCUS Logo Employment Opportunities Donate Privacy Policy MembershipMember Information ARCUS Members Member Representatives Organizational Member Application Annual Meetings ProgramsStudy of Environmental Arctic Change Sea Ice Prediction Network Sea Ice Outlook Sea Ice for Walrus Outlook Indigenous Scholars External Collaborations for the Interagency Arctic Research Policy Committee PolarTREC The Arctic in the Classroom Logistics Arctic System Science Program Bering Ecosystem Science Joint Science Education Project (JSEP) MeetingsARCUS at POLAR2018 Women's Perspectives Luncheon at Polar2018 Research Seminar Series Alaska Marine Science Symposium 2018 AGU Community Meetings ARCUS Annual Meetings Arctic Research Day Arctic Science Summit Week 2017 USArray Sustainability Workshop 2016 NPS Symposium ARCUS at Arctic Circle 2016 Arctic Science Ministerial Side-Event Arctic Science Summit Week 2016 Sea Ice Prediction Network Meetings Past MeetingsAlaska Marine Science Symposium 2016 2013 Logistics Workshop State of the Arctic 2011 Southwest Alaska Park Science Symposium Northern Oil and Gas Forum NPS Park Science in the Arctic USFWS WildREACH CalendarUpcoming Events Search Events Submit Event Past Events ResourcesArctic System Synthesis Report ArcticInfoSubmission About Witness the Arctic Witness Community Highlights Directory of Arctic Researchers Publications Directory News Archive Conducting Research with Northern Communities Arctic Visiting Speakers Polar Education List Purchase Items ARCUS Archive Site DonateARCUS Membership Donation Giving to ARCUS Donor Levels", "United States Permafrost Association MEMBERSHIP CORPORATE MEMBERS INSTITUTIONAL MEMBERS MEETINGS CONTRIBUTE REPORTS KIDS LINKS HOME President Dmitry Streletskiy President Elect John Zarling Past President Thomas Douglas Secretary Susan Wilson Treasurer Gerald Frost Board Members Cathy Wilson John Thornley IPA Representative Fritz Nelson Thomas Krzewinski PYRN Representative: Matthew Whitley US Permafrost Association PO Box 750141 Fairbanks, AK 99775-0141 Ph: 302-831-0852 Fax 302-831-6654 Frozen Ground 2018 Permafrost Glossary Most of the definitions given below were taken from the Multi-Language Glossary of Permafrost and Related Ground-Ice Terms (van Everdingen, 1998). This source should be consulted for more extensive definitions. Updates, modifications, or new definitions are indicated by inclusion of additional references. Active Layer The layer of ground subject to annual thawing and freezing in areas underlain by permafrost Active-layer Detachment Slide Shallow landslides that develop in permafrost areas, involving reduction in effective stress and strength at the contact between a thawing overburden and underlying frozen material. Active-layer detachment slides can occur in response to high seasonal air temperature, summer rainfall events, rapid melting of snowcover, or surface disturbances See Lewkowicz (1992). Active-layer Thickness The thickness of the layer of ground subject to annual thawing and freezing in areas underlain by permafrost (cf. thaw depth) See Nelson and Hinkel (2003). Alas A large depression of the ground surface produced by thawing of a large area (e.g., > 1 ha) of very thick and exceedingly ice-rich permafrost. Cryoturbation A collective term used to describe all soil movements due to frost action. Irregular structures formed in earth materials by frost penetration and frost action processes, and characterized by folded, broken, and dislocated beds and lenses of unconsolidated deposits, included organic horizons, or bedrock. Degree-day A derived unit of measurement used to express the departure of the mean temperature for a day from a given reference temperature. Also see freezing index and thawing index. Depth Of Zero Annual Amplitude The distance from the ground surface downward to the level beneath which there is practically no annual fluctuation in ground temperature. Excess Ice The volume of ice in the ground that exceeds the total pore volume that the ground would have under natural unfrozen conditions. Freeze-thaw Cycle Freezing of material, followed by thawing. The two fundamental frequencies involved are diurnal and annual. Freezing Index The cumulative number of degree-days below 0oC for a given time period (usually seasonal). Frost Action The process of alternate freezing and thawing of moisture in soil, rock, and other materials, and the resulting effects on materials and on structures placed on or in the ground. Frost Creep The net downslope displacement that occurs when a soil, during a freeze-thaw cycle, expands perpendicular to the ground surface and settles in a nearly vertical direction. Frost Heave The upward or outward movement of the ground surface (or objects on or in the ground) caused by the formation of ice in the soil. Frost Mound Any mound-shaped landform produced by ground freezing, combined with accumulation of ground ice due to groundwater movement or migration of soil moisture. Also see Nelson et al. (1992). Frost Penetration The movement of a freezing front into the ground during freezing. Frost Susceptible Soil Subsurface earth materials in which segregated ice will form (causing frost heave) under the required conditions of moisture supply and temperature. Frozen Ground Soil or rock in which part or all of the pore water has turned into ice. Gas Hydrate A special form of solid clathrate compound in which crystal lattice cages or chambers, consisting of host molecules, enclose guest molecules. Gelifluction The slow downslope flow of unfrozen earth materials over a frozen substrate. Also see solifluction. Geocryology The study of earth materials and processes involving temperatures of 0oC or below. Geothermal Gradient The rate of temperature increase with depth below the ground surface. Ground Ice A general term referring to all types of ice contained in freezing and frozen ground. High-center Polygon An ice-wedge polygon in which melting of the surrounding ice wedges has left the central area in a relatively elevated position. Ice Lens A dominantly horizontal, lens-shaped body of ice of any dimension. View Example Image Ice Segregation The formation of discrete layers or lenses of segregated ice in freezing mineral or organic soils, as a result of the migration and subsequent freezing of pore water. Ice Wedge A massive, generally wedge-shaped body with its apex pointing downward, composed of foliated or vertically banded, commonly white, ice. Ice-wedge Polygon A network of ice wedges defining the boundaries of a geometric polygon in plan view. Intrusive Ice Ice formed from water injected into soils or rocks. Latent Heat Of Fusion The amount of heat required to melt all ice (or freeze all pore water) in a unit mass of soil or rock. For pure water this quantity is 334 J g-1. Low-center Polygon An ice-wedge polygon in which thawing of ice-rich permafrost has left the central area in a relatively depressed position. Mass Wasting (mass Movement) Downslope movement of soil or rock on or near the earth?s surface under the influence of gravity. Massive Ice A comprehensive term used to describe large masses of ground ice, including ice wedges, pingo ice, buried ice, and large ice lenses. Mean Annual Air Temperature (MAAT) Mean annual temperature of the air, measured at standard screen height above the ground surface. Mean Annual Ground -surface Temperature (MAGST) Mean annual temperature at the surface of the ground. Mean Annual Ground Temperature (MAGT) Mean annual temperature of the ground at a specified depth. N-factor The ratio of the freezing or thawing index at the ground surface to that derived from air temperature records. Palsas Permafrost mounds ranging from about 0.5 to about 10 m in height and exceeding about 2 m in average diameter, comprising (1) aggradation forms and (2) degradation forms. The term ?palsa? is a descriptive term to which an adjectival modifier prefix can be attached to indicate formative processes. See Washburn (1983) and Nelson et al. (1992). Patterned Ground A general term for any ground surface exhibiting a discernibly ordered, more or less sysmmetrical, morphological pattern of ground and, where present, vegetation. View Example Image Periglacial The conditions, processes, and landforms associated with cold, nonglacial environments, regardless of proximity to past or present glaciers. Permafrost Earth materials that remains continuously at or below 0oC for at least two consecutive years. Permafrost, Continuous Regions in which permafrost occurs nearly everywhere beneath the exposed land surface. At the circumpolar scale the term continuous permafrost zone refers to a broad area, crudely conformable with latitude, in which permafrost is laterally continuous. See Nelson and Outcalt (1987). Permafrost, Discontinuous Regions in which permafrost is laterally discontinuous owing to heterogeneity of material properties, subsurface water, and surface cover. Permafrost, Dry Permafrost containing neither free water nor ice. Permafrost, Ice-rich Permafrost containing excess ice. Pingo A perennial frost mound consisting of a core of massive ice produced primarily by injection of water, and covered with soil and vegetation. Retrogressive Thaw Slump A slope failure resulting from thawing if ice-rich permafrost. Seasonally Frozen Ground Ground that freezes and thaws annually. Solifluction A general term referring to the slow downslope flow of saturated unfrozen earth materials over an impermeable substrate (cf. gelifluction). Thaw Consolidation Time-dependent compression resulting from thawing of ice-rich frozen ground and subsequent draining of excess water. Thaw Depth The instantaneous depth below the ground surface to which seasonal thaw has penetrated (cf. active-layer thickness). See Nelson and Hinkel (2003). Thaw Lake A lake whose basin was formed or enlarged by thawing of frozen ground. Hopkins (1949), Washburn (1980, 271). Thaw Settlement Compression of the ground due to loss of excess ground ice and attendant thaw consolidation. Thawing Index (DDT) The cumulative number of degree-days above 0oC for given time period (usually seasonal). Thermal Conductivity The quantity of heat that will flow through a unit area of a substance in unit time under a unit temperature gradient. In permafrost investigations thermal conductivity is usually expressed in W m-1 oC-1 Thermal Erosion Erosion of ice-bearing permafrost by the combined thermal and mechanical action of moving water. Thermal Offset Temperature depression in the upper layer of permafrost, resulting from the combined effects of seasonal differences of thermal conductivity and the operation of nonconductive processes in the active layer. See Williams and Smith (1989) and Nelson et al. (1985). See Goodrich (1982). Thermokarst Terrain Irregular topography resulting from the melting of excess ground ice and subsequent thaw settlement. Zero Curtain Effect Persistence of a nearly constant temperature very close to the freezing point of water during annual freezing (and occasionally thawing) of the active layer. See Outcalt et al. (1990). Copyright \u00a9 2018 United States Permafrost Association Maintained by GW @ EEI", "Permafrost - Alaska Nature and Science (U.S. National Park Service) Skip to global NPS navigation Skip to main content Skip to footer National Park Service Logo National Park Service Search This Site All NPS Search Open Menu Explore This Park Alaska Nature and Science \u00d7 Contact Us Permafrost Exposed yedoma permafrost exposed along an eroded Arctic coast. NPS Permafrost is permanently frozen ground that underlies much of the landscape in the Arctic. It affects nearly everything in the Arctic ecosystem, including soils, vegetation, water, and wildlife. During summer months, the top layer of soil thaws creating a wet landscape with rapid runoff. The striking quilt-like pattern of permafrost landscapes is caused by the build-up and thawing of ice in the ground, which produces pits, ponds, and landslides. Annual permafrost thaw is normal, but thawing is expected to increase with climate change. The National Park Service is monitoring permafrost and the land dynamics associated with permafrost thaw to better understand the changes and the effects on the landscape. Permafrost Terminology Permafrost ground that remains frozen longer than two consecutive years; ground that doesn't thaw in the summer Yedoma an organic-rich Pleistocene-age permafrost with high ice content Active Layer in areas with permafrost, the top portion of the soil that thaws and refreezes each year Ice Wedge polygon-like pattern on the landscape associated with permafrost caused by repeated cycles of melting, freezing, and cracking Thermokarst landscape formations associated with permafrost thaw Pingo an earth-covered mound of ice, which creates topography and provides habitat for arctic foxes Slump a term that refers to the sagging or degradation of the landscape caused by permafrost thaw Hydrology the study of the location, movement, and quality of water on earth; heavily influenced by permafrost in Arctic systems Erosion the transport of soil and rock from the earth's surface by wind or water; a significant effect of permafrost thaw Learn more about permafrost Sort By: Relevance Recently Updated Title Show 10 40 per page Loading results... Tags: permafrost permafrost permafrost thaw Last updated: July 27, 2017 Tools Site Index Contact Us Stay Connected Facebook Twitter Instagram Flickr Search This Site All NPS National Park Service U.S. Department of the Interior National Park Service Logo National Park Service Logo Accessibility Privacy Policy FOIA Notices Disclaimer FAQ No Fear Act Contact Us USA.gov Facebook Facebook Facebook Youtube Youtube Youtube Twitter Twitter Twitter Instagram Instagram Instagram Flickr Flickr Flickr iTunes iTunes iTunes", "Glossary - International Permafrost Association Arctic Portal AP Community Portlets Arctic Council Science Organizations Maps Library Acronyms Links Search International Permafrost Association Fostering permafrost research to the ends of the Earth Search ... Member login Contact \ufeff Menu HomeAbout Us Antarctic Permafrost and Periglacial EnvironmentsCoastal and Offshore Permafrost Dynamics (COPD)CryosolGlaciers and Permafrost Hazards in High Mountain Slopes (GAPHAZ)Isotopes and Geochemistry of PermafrostPeriglacial Landforms, Processes and ClimatePermafrost and Climate Modeling and Mapping Subgroup Planetary Permafrost and AstrobiologyPermafrost Engineering Subgroup on Engineering Geology for Development in Permafrost Regions Task Force on Remote SensingTask Force on Subglacial PermafrostStanding Committee on Data, Information and CommunicationsStanding Committee on Education and OutreachInternational Advisory Committee for ICOPCarbon Pools in Permafrost Regions (CAPP)Arctic Circumpolar Coastal Observatory Network (ACCONET)Arctic Coastal Dynamics (ACD)International Polar Year (2007-2009) OfficersCountry MembersConstitutionResolutionsExternal RelationsStanding Committees ANTPASEducation & Outreach HistoryBecome a Member Activities Action GroupsInterest Groups Permafrost and Carbon Budgets Core Projects PRP IPA Awards Pewe AwardMelnikov AwardLifetime Award Outreach Outreach ActivitiesPYRN Meetings International ConferencesRegional Conferences Publications IPA Newsletter - Frozen GroundIPA Country ReportsPPP ReportsConference ProceedingsReports and MinutesHandbookGlossaryOccasional Publications What is Permafrost?International Report \"State of the Arctic Coast 2010\" Products Permafrost Data IPA Permafrost MapGTN-P Workshop 2015GTN-P Workshop 2013GTN-P Workshop 2011TSPCALM Mailing ListCourses (IUCP)Media PrintGalleriesPodcasts Member Area Home Publications Glossary Glossary Download the Glossary of Permafrost and Related Ground-Ice Terms (1988) here. The IPA is planning to publish an update of the Glossary in the near future. IPA Newsletter - Frozen Ground IPA Country Reports PPP Reports Conference Proceedings Reports and Minutes Handbook Glossary Occasional Publications What is Permafrost? Contact: contact@ipa-permafrost.orgThe International Permafrost Association website is designed and hosted by the Arctic PortalCopyright \u00a9 2008-2015 International Permafrost Association All Rights Reserved IPA on Facebook IPA on Twitter IPA on Youtube IPA RSS", "Thawing permafrost produces more methane than expected Home Earth Environment March 20, 2018 Thawing permafrost produces more methane than expected March 20, 2018, Helmholtz Association of German Research Centres Sampling at the Lena delta in Siberia. Credit: UHH/CEN/I.Preuss Methane (CH4) is a potent greenhouse gas that is roughly 30 times more harmful to the climate than carbon dioxide (CO2). Both gases are produced in thawing permafrost as dead animal and plant remains are decomposed. However, methane is only formed if no oxygen is available. Until now, it was assumed that larger amounts of greenhouse gases are formed when the ground was dry and well aerated\u2014when oxygen was available. Christian Knoblauch and his colleagues have now demonstrated that water-saturated permafrost soils without oxygen can be twice as harmful to the climate as dry soils\u2014which means the role of methane has been greatly underestimated. Knoblauch has, for the first time, measured and quantified in the laboratory the long-term production of methane in thawing permafrost. The team had to wait for three years before the approximately 40,000 year-old samples from the Siberian Arctic finally produced methane. The team observed the permafrost for a total of seven years, an unprecedented long-term study. They found that without oxygen, equal amounts of methane and CO2 are produced. But since methane is a far more potent greenhouse gas, it is more significant. Because methane production couldn't be measured, it was assumed that in the absence of oxygen only very small amounts of it can be formed. \"It takes an extremely long time until stable methane-producing microorganisms develop in thawing permafrost,\" explains Knoblauch. \"That's why it was so difficult to demonstrate methane production until now.\" \"By combining process-based and molecular-microbiological methods, our study shows for the first time that the methane-forming microorganisms in the thawing permafrost have significant influence on the greenhouse gas budget,\" adds co-author Susanne Liebner from the Helmholtz Center Potsdam\u2014GFZ German Research Center for Geosciences. The team has used the new data to improve a computer model that estimates how much greenhouse gas is produced in permafrost in the long term\u2014and they've compiled a first forecasts. According to the scientists: The permafrost soils of Northern Europe, Northern Asia and North America could produce up to 1 gigaton of methane and 37 gigatons of carbon dioxide by 2100. But there are uncertainties. To what depth will the soil actually thaw by then? Will it be wet or dry? One thing, however, is certain: the new data will enable more accurate predictions about the impacts of thawing permafrost on our climate. Explore further: Thawing permafrost causing the 'browning' of northern lakes More information: Knoblauch C, Beer C, Liebner S, Grigoriev M N, Pfeiffer E-M (2018): Methane production as key to the greenhouse gas budget of thawing permafrost; Nature Climate Change, DOI: 10.1038/s41558-018-0095-z Journal reference: Nature Climate Change Provided by: Helmholtz Association of German Research Centres 782 shares feedback to editors Tweet Favorites Email Print PDF Featured Last comments Popular Asteroids are stronger, harder to destroy than previously thought Mar 04, 2019 29 Researchers find potential new source of rare earth elements Mar 04, 2019 7 America's newest crew capsule rockets toward space station Mar 02, 2019 4 Chirality yields colossal photocurrent Mar 04, 2019 0 Mystery of green icebergs may soon be solved Mar 04, 2019 0 more \u00bb Phys.org on Facebook Email newsletter Subscribe Relevant PhysicsForums posts Historic temperature data in New York/Greenwich on small and large time scales Mar 04, 2019 Do the Perigee and Apogee of the Earth's orbit affect the temperature of our summers? Mar 02, 2019 Mag 6.1 Earthquake, Waitara, NZ - very deep 227.3 km Mar 01, 2019 A 'what if' model of cloud cover and increased warming Feb 26, 2019 Significant cyclone off shore of Queensland, Australia Feb 25, 2019 Highest recorded temperature in a given year Feb 19, 2019 More from Earth Related Stories Thawing permafrost causing the 'browning' of northern lakes March 5, 2018 The organic carbon found in permafrost is being released as the ice melts after ages of confinement in the soil, and making its way into Arctic and subarctic lakes and ponds, modifying their composition. These are the findings ... Thawing permafrost releases old greenhouse gas July 19, 2017 The thawing permafrost soils in the Arctic regions might contribute to the greenhouse effect in two respects: On the one hand, rising temperatures lead to higher microbial methane production close to the surface. On the other ... Carbon dioxide biggest player in thawing permafrost June 13, 2016 Carbon dioxide emissions from dry and oxygen-rich environments are likely to play a much greater role in controlling future rates of climate change caused by permafrost thaw than rates of methane release from oxygen-poor ... Study measures methane release from Arctic permafrost August 22, 2016 A University of Alaska Fairbanks-led research project has provided the first modern evidence of a landscape-level permafrost carbon feedback, in which thawing permafrost releases ancient carbon as climate-warming greenhouse ... Monitoring changes in wetland extent can help predict the rate of climate change June 26, 2017 Monitoring changes to the amount of wetlands in regions where permafrost is thawing should be at the forefront of efforts to predict future rates of climate change, new research shows. Permafrost thawing could accelerate global warming, research says April 7, 2014 A team of researchers lead by Florida State University have found new evidence that permafrost thawing is releasing large quantities of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere via plants, which could accelerate warming trends. Recommended for you Nano-bio-computing lipid nanotablet March 5, 2019 Nanoparticles can be used as substrates for computation, with algorithmic and autonomous control of their unique properties. However, scalable architecture to form nanoparticle-based computing systems is lacking at present. ... CERN lab on the hunt for dark matter March 5, 2019 Europe's physics lab CERN on Tuesday said it was planning a new experiment to look for particles associated with dark matter which is believed to make up some 27 percent of the universe. Astronomers detect deep, long asymmetric occultation in a newly found low-mass star March 5, 2019 An international team of astronomers has observed a deep, day-long asymmetric occultation in a recently detected low-mass star known as EPIC 204376071. In a research paper published February 21 on arXiv.org, the scientists ... Fast, simple new assessment of earthquake hazard March 5, 2019 Geophysicists at Caltech have created a new method for determining earthquake hazards by measuring how fast energy is building up on faults in a specific region, and then comparing that to how much is being released through ... Galactic wind provides clues to evolution of galaxies March 5, 2019 The Cigar Galaxy (also known as M82) is famous for its extraordinary speed in making new stars, with stars being born 10 times faster than in the Milky Way. Now, data from the Stratospheric Observatory for Infrared Astronomy, ... Technique streamlines fabrication of 2-D circuits March 5, 2019 Exotic 2-D materials hold great promise for creating atom-thin circuits that could power flexible electronics, optoelectronics, and other next-generation devices. But fabricating complex 2-D circuits requires multiple time-consuming, ... New reactor-liner alloy material offers strength, resilience March 5, 2019 A new tungsten-based alloy developed at Los Alamos National Laboratory can withstand unprecedented amounts of radiation without damage. Essential for extreme irradiation environments such as the interiors of magnetic fusion ... 1 comment 2.5 Adjust slider to filter visible comments by rank Display comments: newest first Steve Case not rated yet Mar 20, 2018 Methane (CH4) is a potent greenhouse gas that is roughly 30 times more harmful to the climate than carbon dioxide (CO2).What does that mean? I t certainly doesn't tell us how much methane will run-up global temperatures. Methane has been tracked since 1984. We know it's concentration, infrared absorption spectrum and we know how much it's increasing every year. We also know the basic physics of the green house gasses, but what we don't seem to know, at least we are NEVER told is how much methane will run-up global temperatures. The reason for that is probably because it isn't very much, most likely not even measurable. Well really, do a Google search and see if you can find out out much methane, business as usual, will run up temperatures by 2100. You will come up empty. Steve Case - Milwaukee, WI Please sign in to add a comment. Registration is free, and takes less than a minute. Read more Click here to reset your password. Sign in to get notified via email when new comments are made. phys.org Nanotechnology All Nanotechnology Bio & Medicine Nanomaterials Nanophysics Physics All Physics Condensed Matter General Physics Optics & Photonics Plasma Physics Quantum Physics Soft Matter Superconductivity Earth All Earth Earth Sciences Environment Astronomy & Space All Astronomy & Space Astrobiology Astronomy Space Exploration Technology All Technology Automotive Business Computer Sciences Consumer & Gadgets Energy & Green Tech Engineering Hardware Hi Tech & Innovation Internet Machine Learning & AI Other Robotics Security Semiconductors Software Telecom Chemistry All Chemistry Analytical Chemistry Biochemistry Materials Science Other Polymers Biology All Biology Biotechnology Cell & Microbiology Ecology Evolution Molecular & Computational Biology Other Plants & Animals Other Sciences All Other Sciences Archaeology & Fossils Economics & Business Education Mathematics Other Political Science Social Sciences Enter your Science X account credentials Remember me Forget password? Sign In Sign in with your Facebook or Google+ account Not a member? Register Profile Newsletter Favorites Activity PM My news Sign out Top Home Search Mobile version Help FAQ About Contact Science X Account Sponsored Account Newsletter RSS feeds Feature Stories Latest news Week's top Archive Android app iOS app Amazon Kindle Connect Privacy Policy Terms of Use \u00a9 Phys.org 2003 - 2019, Science X network", "What is Permafrost? - International Permafrost Association Arctic Portal AP Community Portlets Arctic Council Science Organizations Maps Library Acronyms Links Search International Permafrost Association Fostering permafrost research to the ends of the Earth Search ... Member login Contact \ufeff Menu HomeAbout Us Antarctic Permafrost and Periglacial EnvironmentsCoastal and Offshore Permafrost Dynamics (COPD)CryosolGlaciers and Permafrost Hazards in High Mountain Slopes (GAPHAZ)Isotopes and Geochemistry of PermafrostPeriglacial Landforms, Processes and ClimatePermafrost and Climate Modeling and Mapping Subgroup Planetary Permafrost and AstrobiologyPermafrost Engineering Subgroup on Engineering Geology for Development in Permafrost Regions Task Force on Remote SensingTask Force on Subglacial PermafrostStanding Committee on Data, Information and CommunicationsStanding Committee on Education and OutreachInternational Advisory Committee for ICOPCarbon Pools in Permafrost Regions (CAPP)Arctic Circumpolar Coastal Observatory Network (ACCONET)Arctic Coastal Dynamics (ACD)International Polar Year (2007-2009) OfficersCountry MembersConstitutionResolutionsExternal RelationsStanding Committees ANTPASEducation & Outreach HistoryBecome a Member Activities Action GroupsInterest Groups Permafrost and Carbon Budgets Core Projects PRP IPA Awards Pewe AwardMelnikov AwardLifetime Award Outreach Outreach ActivitiesPYRN Meetings International ConferencesRegional Conferences Publications IPA Newsletter - Frozen GroundIPA Country ReportsPPP ReportsConference ProceedingsReports and MinutesHandbookGlossaryOccasional Publications What is Permafrost?International Report \"State of the Arctic Coast 2010\" Products Permafrost Data IPA Permafrost MapGTN-P Workshop 2015GTN-P Workshop 2013GTN-P Workshop 2011TSPCALM Mailing ListCourses (IUCP)Media PrintGalleriesPodcasts Member Area Home Publications Occasional Publications What is Permafrost? What is permafrost? Permafrost Distribution Permafrost is defined as ground (soil or rock and included ice or organic material) that remains at or below 0\u00b0C for at least two consecutive years. Lowland permafrost regions are traditionally divided into several zones based on estimated geographic continuity in the landscape. A typical classification recognizes continuous permafrost (underlying 90-100% of the landscape); discontinuous permafrost (50-90%); and sporadic permafrost (0-50%). In the Northern Hemisphere, regions in which permafrost occurs occupy approximately 25% (23 million km\u00b2) of the land area. In the discontinuous and sporadic zones permafrost distribution is complex and patchy, and permafrost-free terrain is common. The thickness of permafrost varies from less than one meter to more than 1500 meters.Most of the permafrost existing today formed during cold glacial periods, and has persisted through warmer interglacial periods, including the {tooltip}Holocene{end-link}The Holocene is a geological epoch which began approximately 11,700 years ago{end-tooltip} (last 10,000 years). Some relatively shallow permafrost (30 to 70 meters) formed during the second part of the Holocene (last 6,000 years) and some during the Little Ice Age (from 400 to 150 years ago). In continental interiors permafrost temperatures at the boundaries between continuous and discontinuous are generally about -5\u00b0C corresponding roughly with the -8\u00b0C mean annual air temperature. Permafrost in mid- and low- latitude mountains is warm and its distribution is closely related to characteristics of the land surface, such slope gradient and orientation, vegetation patterns, and snow cover.Subsea permafrost occurs close to 0\u00b0C over large areas of the {tooltip}Arctic continental shelf{end-link}The continental shelf is the extended perimeter of each continent and associated coastal plain, and was part of the continent during the glacial periods, but is undersea during interglacial periods such as the current epoch by relatively shallow seas (known as shelf seas) and gulfs.{end-tooltip}, where it formed during the last glacial period on the exposed shelf landscapes. Permafrost is geographically continuous beneath the ice-free regions of the Antarctic continent and also occurs beneath areas in which the ice sheet is frozen to its bed. Recent Changes Permafrost can be used as a paleothermometer\u2014fluctuations of air temperature from the late 19th and 20th centuries can be obtained by measuring temperature in deep permafrost {tooltip}boreholes{end-link}A borehole is the generalised term for any narrow shaft drilled in the ground, either vertically or horizontally{end-tooltip}. Warming since the late 1960s has been observed in permafrost temperature profiles from many locations. Over the past several decades, permafrost temperature have generally warmed in lowlands and mountains; exceptions are in some newly exposed drained lake basins and aggrading shorelines where permafrost is forming. Thawing of permafrost has been observed in many lowland and mountain locations in recent decades\u2014much of the evidence is indirect, and is based on changes in forest and tundra vegetation, differential subsidence of the ground surface, and loss of lakes. Increases in {tooltip}active-layer{end-link}The layer of ground that is subject to annual thawing and freezing in areas underlain by permafrost{end-tooltip} thickness have been observed in warm summers (for western North America; 1989, 1998, 2004), resulting in increased slope failures, ground subsidence in ice-rich terrain, increased lake drainage.\u00a0 At regional and global scales, changes in permafrost zonal boundaries are difficult to identify due to 3-dimensional irregularities in permafrost distribution.\u00a0 Degradation of permafrost and changes in its distribution are associated with increased formation of {tooltip}\u201ctaliks\u201d{end-link}A layer or body of unfrozen ground occurring in a permafrost area due to a local anomaly in thermal, hydrological, hydrogeological, or hydrochemical conditions{end-tooltip}. Open taliks penetrate through the permafrost and closed taliks or thawed depressions occur under deep lakes and rivers. 21th Century Changes Changes in zonal permafrost \u201cboundaries\u201d modeled using climate-change scenarios are usually based on predictions of increased active-layer thickness and temperature changes at relatively shallow permafrost depths, not on the complete disappearance of permafrost. Warm permafrost degrades from both the top and bottom, increasing the extent of talik formation. The southern limit of permafrost moves northward in an irregular pattern, and is governed by localized factors that include {tooltip}peatland{end-link}Peat is an accumulation of partially decayed vegetation matter. Peat forms in wetlands or peatlands, variously called bogs, moors, muskegs, pocosins, mires, and peat swamp forests{end-tooltip} distribution, soil moisture, vegetation patterns, and snow cover. Movements of the \u201cboundary\u201d between the sporadic and discontinuous permafrost zones are largely governed by the development and extent of open taliks. In areas of ice-rich permafrost, the southern \u201cboundary\u201d of the continuous permafrost zone remains relatively stable as complete disappearance of permafrost may take centuries to millennia, making it difficult to determine geographic changes except where permafrost is thin. Rapid coastal erosion, although sustained by storms and related wave intensity, is highly dependent on the amount and type of {tooltip}ground ice{end-link}A general term referring to all types of ice contained in freezing and frozen ground.in the near-surface permafrost{end-tooltip}. Changes in permafrost distribution predicted by models require extensive field- or remote-sensed based verification over extended time periods (snapshots of permafrost temperature over decadal intervals). Monitoring of the thermal state of permafrost\u00a0 (TSP) at the global scale is required to understand hydrologic connections, future changes in permafrost distribution, and to serve as validation global and regional models.\u00a0 The International Polar Year (IPY) can leave a legacy for the understanding of permafrost dynamics through the IPA international observational networks (see www.ipy.org and projects 33, 50 and 90). More Reading All about frozen ground (NSIDC) What is permafrost? (Geological Survey of Canada) NSIDC's Permafrost and Frozen Ground glossary International Permafrost Association News UNEP's Global Outlook for Ice and Snow (Frozen Ground chapter) Permafrost- what is it? (Alfred Wegener Institute, also available in German) IPA Newsletter - Frozen Ground IPA Country Reports PPP Reports Conference Proceedings Reports and Minutes Handbook Glossary Occasional Publications What is Permafrost? Contact: contact@ipa-permafrost.orgThe International Permafrost Association website is designed and hosted by the Arctic PortalCopyright \u00a9 2008-2015 International Permafrost Association All Rights Reserved IPA on Facebook IPA on Twitter IPA on Youtube IPA RSS", "Permafrost | geology | Britannica.com ENCYCLOP\u00c6DIA BRITANNICA START YOUR FREE TRIAL Log In \u00b7 Join Demystified Quizzes Galleries Lists On This Day Biographies Newsletters START YOUR FREE TRIAL Search Britannica What are you looking for? Search Click here to search Browse popular topics: Crystal Palace Victoria Monroe Doctrine Kepler's laws of planetary motion Open Door policy Bring fact-checked results to the top of your browser search. Learn More. Permafrostgeology Written By: Troy L. P\u00e9w\u00e9 See Article History Alternative Title: ground ice Permafrost, perennially frozen ground, a naturally occurring material with a temperature colder than 0 \u00b0C (32 \u00b0F) continuously for two or more years. Such a layer of frozen ground is designated exclusively on the basis of temperature. Part or all of its moisture may be unfrozen, depending on the chemical composition of the water or the depression of the freezing point by capillary forces. Permafrost with saline soil moisture, for example, may be colder than 0 \u00b0C for several years but contain no ice and thus not be firmly cemented. Most permafrost, however, is consolidated by ice.Division of subarctic and Arctic regions showing distribution of permafrost and glaciers.Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica, Inc.Permafrost with no water, and thus no ice, is termed dry permafrost. The upper surface of permafrost is called the permafrost table. In permafrost areas the surface layer of ground that freezes in the winter (seasonally frozen ground) and thaws in summer is called the active layer. The thickness of the active layer depends mainly on the moisture content, varying from less than a foot in thickness in wet, organic sediments to several feet in well-drained gravels.Permafrost forms and exists in a climate where the mean annual air temperature is 0 \u00b0C or colder. Such a climate is generally characterized by long, cold winters with little snow and short, relatively dry, cool summers. Permafrost, therefore, is widespread in the Arctic, sub-Arctic, and Antarctica. It is estimated to underlie 20 percent of the world\u2019s land surface. Read More on This Topic glacial landform: Permafrost, patterned ground, solifluction deposits, and pingos Permafrost is ground that remains perennially frozen (see permafrost). It covers about 20\u201325 percent of the Earth\u2019s land surface today. The \u201cactive layer\u201d of soil close to the surface of permafrost regions undergoes many seasonal and daily freeze-thaw\u2026 Distribution in the Northern Hemisphere Permafrost zones Permafrost is widespread in the northern part of the Northern Hemisphere, where it occurs in 85 percent of Alaska, 55 percent of Russia and Canada, and probably all of Antarctica. Permafrost is more widespread and extends to greater depths in the north than in the south. It is 1,500 metres (5,000 feet) thick in northern Siberia, 740 metres thick in northern Alaska, and thins progressively toward the south. Most permafrost can be differentiated into two broad zones; the continuous and the discontinuous, referring to the lateral continuity of permafrost. In the continuous zone of the far north, permafrost is nearly everywhere present except under the lakes and rivers that do not freeze to the bottom. The discontinuous zone includes numerous permafrost-free areas that increase progressively in size and number from north to south. Near the southern boundary, only rare patches of permafrost have been found to exist. In addition to its widespread occurrence in the Arctic and subarctic areas of the Earth, permafrost also exists at lower latitudes in areas of high elevation. This type of perennially frozen ground is called Alpine permafrost. Although data from high plateaus and mountains are scarce, measurements taken below the active surface layer indicate zones where temperatures of 0 \u00b0C or colder persist for two or more years. The largest area of Alpine permafrost is in western China, where 1,500,000 square kilometres (580,000 square miles) of permafrost are known to exist. In the contiguous United States, Alpine permafrost is limited to about 100,000 square kilometres in the high mountains of the west. Permafrost occurs at elevations as low as 2,500 metres in the northern states and at about 3,500 metres in Arizona. A unique occurrence of permafrost\u2014one that has no analogue on land\u2014lies under the Arctic Ocean, on the northern continental shelves of North America and Eurasia. This is known as subsea or offshore permafrost. Study of permafrost Although the existence of permafrost had been known to the inhabitants of Siberia for centuries, scientists of the Western world did not take seriously the isolated reports of a great thickness of frozen ground existing under northern forest and grasslands until 1836. Then, Alexander Theodor von Middendorff measured temperatures to depths of approximately 100 metres of permafrost in the Shargin shaft, an unsuccessful well dug for the governor of the Russian-Alaskan Trading Company, at Yakutsk, and estimated that the permafrost was 215 metres thick. Since the late 19th century, Russian scientists and engineers have actively studied permafrost and applied the results of their learning to the development of Russia\u2019s north. In a similar way, prospectors and explorers were aware of permafrost in the northern regions of North America for many years, but it was not until after World War II that systematic studies of perennially frozen ground were undertaken by scientists and engineers in the United States and Canada. Since exploitation of the great petroleum resources on the northern continental shelves began in earnest in the 1970s, investigations into subsea permafrost have progressed even more rapidly than have studies of permafrost on land. Alpine permafrost studies had their beginning in the study of rock glaciers in the Alps of Switzerland. Although ice was known to exist in rock glaciers, it was not until after World War II that investigation by geophysical methods clearly demonstrated slow movement of perennial ice\u2014i.e., permafrost. In the 1970s and \u201980s, detailed geophysical work and temperature and borehole examination of mountain permafrost began in Russia, China, and Scandinavia, especially with regard to construction in high mountain and plateau areas. Origin and stability of permafrost Air temperature and ground temperature In areas where the mean annual air temperature becomes colder than 0 \u00b0C, some of the ground frozen in the winter will not be completely thawed in the summer; therefore, a layer of permafrost will form and continue to grow downward gradually each year from the seasonally frozen ground. The permafrost layer will become thicker each winter, its thickness controlled by the thermal balance between the heat flow from the Earth\u2019s interior and that flowing outward into the atmosphere. This balance depends on the mean annual air temperature and the geothermal gradient. The average geothermal gradient is an increase of 1 \u00b0C (1.8 \u00b0F) for every 30 to 60 metres of depth. Eventually the thickening permafrost layer reaches an equilibrium depth at which the amount of geothermal heat reaching the permafrost is on the average equal to that lost to the atmosphere. Thousands of years are required to attain a state of equilibrium where permafrost is hundreds of feet thick. The annual fluctuation of air temperature from winter to summer is reflected in a subdued manner in the upper few metres of the ground. This fluctuation diminishes rapidly with depth, being only a few degrees at 7.5 metres, and is barely detectable at 15 metres. The level of zero amplitude, at which fluctuations are hardly detectable, is 9 to 15 metres. If the permafrost is in thermal equilibrium, the temperature at the level of zero amplitude is generally regarded as the minimum temperature of the permafrost. Below this depth the temperature increases steadily under the influence of heat from the Earth\u2019s interior. The temperature of permafrost at the depth of minimum annual seasonal change varies from near 0 \u00b0C at the southern limit of permafrost to \u221210 \u00b0C (14 \u00b0F) in northern Alaska and \u221213 \u00b0C (9 \u00b0F) in northeastern Siberia. As the climate becomes colder or warmer, but maintaining a mean annual temperature colder than 0 \u00b0C, the temperature of the permafrost correspondingly rises or declines, resulting in changes in the position of the base of permafrost. The position of the top of permafrost will be lowered by thawing when the climate warms to a mean annual air temperature warmer than 0 \u00b0C. The rate at which the base or top of permafrost is changed depends not only on the amount of climatic fluctuation but also on the amount of ice in the ground and the composition of the ground, conditions that in part control the geothermal gradient. If the geothermal gradient is known and if the surface temperature remains stable for a long period of time, it is, therefore, possible to predict from a knowledge of the mean annual air temperature the thickness of permafrost in a particular area that is remote from bodies of water. Climatic change Permafrost is the result of present climate. Many temperature profiles show, however, that permafrost is not in equilibrium with present climate at the sites of measurement. Some areas show, for example, that climatic warming since the last third of the 19th century has caused a warming of the permafrost to a depth of more than 100 metres. In such areas much of the permafrost is a product of a colder, former climate.melting permafrost: avalanchesLearn about researchers studying melting permafrost on mountains in order to predict and protect against avalanches.Contunico \u00a9 ZDF Enterprises GmbH, Mainz The distribution and characteristics of subsea permafrost point to a similar origin. At the height of the glacial epoch, especially about 20,000 years ago, most of the continental shelf in the Arctic Ocean was exposed to polar climates for thousands of years. These climates caused cold permafrost to form to depths of more than 700 metres. Subsequently, within the past 10,000 years, the Arctic Ocean rose and advanced over a frozen landscape to produce a degrading relict subsea permafrost. The perennially frozen ground is no longer exposed to a cold atmosphere, and the salt water has caused a reduction in strength and consequent melting of the ice-rich permafrost (which is bonded by freshwater ice). The temperature of subsea permafrost, near \u22121 \u00b0C (30 \u00b0F), is no longer as low as it was in glacial times and is therefore sensitive to warming from geothermal heat and to the encroaching activities of humans. It is thought that permafrost first occurred in conjunction with the onset of glacial conditions about three million years ago, during the late Pliocene Epoch. In the subarctic at least, most permafrost probably disappeared during interglacial times and reappeared in glacial times. Most existing permafrost in the subarctic probably formed in the cold (glacial) period of the past 100,000 years. Local thickness The thickness and areal distribution of permafrost are directly affected by snow and vegetation cover, topography, bodies of water, the interior heat of the Earth, and the temperature of the atmosphere, as mentioned earlier. Effects of climate The most conspicuous change in thickness of permafrost is related to climate. At Barrow, Alaska, U.S., the mean annual air temperature is \u221212 \u00b0C (10 \u00b0F), and the thickness is 400 metres. At Fairbanks, Alaska, in the discontinuous zone of permafrost in central Alaska, the mean annual air temperature is \u22123 \u00b0C (27 \u00b0F), and the thickness is about 90 metres. Near the southern border of permafrost, the mean annual air temperature is about 0 or \u22121 \u00b0C, and the perennially frozen ground is only a few feet thick. If the mean annual air temperature is the same in two areas, the permafrost will be thicker where the conductivity of the ground is higher and the geothermal gradient is less. A.H. Lachenbruch of the U.S. Geological Survey reports an interesting example from northern Alaska. The mean annual air temperatures at Cape Simpson and Prudhoe Bay are similar, but permafrost thickness is 275 metres at Cape Simpson and about 650 metres at Prudhoe Bay because rocks at Prudhoe Bay are more siliceous and have a higher conductivity and a lower geothermal gradient than rocks at Cape Simpson. Effects of water bodies Bodies of water, lakes, rivers, and the sea have a profound effect on the distribution of permafrost. A deep lake that does not freeze to the bottom during the winter will be underlain by a zone of thawed material. If the minimum horizontal dimension of the deep lake is about twice as much as the thickness of permafrost nearby, there probably exists an unfrozen vertical zone extending all the way to the bottom of permafrost. Such thawed areas extending all the way through permafrost are widespread under rivers and sites of recent rivers in the discontinuous zone of permafrost and under major, deep rivers in the far north. Under the wide floodplains of rivers in the subarctic, the permafrost is sporadically distributed both laterally and vertically. Small, shallow lakes that freeze to the bottom each winter are underlain by a zone of thawed material, but the thawed zone does not completely penetrate permafrost except near the southern border of permafrost. Effects of solar radiation, vegetation, and snow cover Inasmuch as south-facing hillslopes receive more incoming solar energy per unit area than other slopes, they are warmer; permafrost is generally absent on these in the discontinuous zone and is thinner in the continuous zone. The main role of vegetation in permafrost areas is to shield perennially frozen ground from solar energy. Vegetation is an excellent insulating medium and removal or disturbance of it, either by natural processes or by humans, causes thawing of the underlying permafrost. In the continuous zone the permafrost table may merely be lowered by the disturbance of vegetation, but in a discontinuous zone permafrost may be completely destroyed in certain areas. Snow cover also influences heat flow between the ground and the atmosphere and therefore affects the distribution of permafrost. If the net effect of timely snowfalls is to prevent heat from leaving the ground in the cold winter, permafrost becomes warmer. Actually, local differences in vegetation and snowfall in areas of thin and warm permafrost are critical for the formation and existence of the perennially frozen ground. Permafrost is not present in areas of the world where great snow thicknesses persist throughout most of the winter. Ice content Types of ground ice The ice content of permafrost is probably the most important feature of permafrost affecting human life in the north. Ice in the perennially frozen ground exists in various sizes and shapes and has definite distribution characteristics. The forms of ground ice can be grouped into five main types: (1) pore ice, (2) segregated, or Taber, ice, (3) foliated, or wedge, ice, (4) pingo ice, and (5) buried ice. 1. Pore ice, which fills or partially fills pore spaces in the ground, is formed by pore water freezing in situ with no addition of water. The ground contains no more water in the solid state than it could hold in the liquid state. 2. Segregated, or Taber, ice includes ice films, seams, lenses, pods, or layers generally 0.15 to 13 centimetres (0.06 to 5 inches) thick that grow in the ground by drawing in water as the ground freezes. Small ice segregations are the least spectacular but one of the most extensive types of ground ice, and engineers and geologists interested in ice growth and its effect on engineering structures have studied them considerably. Such observers generally accept the principle of bringing water to a growing ice crystal, but they do not completely agree as to the mechanics of the processes. Pore ice and Taber ice occur both in seasonally frozen ground and in permafrost. 3. Foliated ground ice, or wedge ice, is the term for large masses of ice growing in thermal contraction cracks in permafrost. 4. Pingo ice is clear, or relatively clear, and occurs in permafrost more or less horizontally or in lens-shaped masses. Such ice originates from groundwater under hydrostatic pressure. 5. Buried ice in permafrost includes buried sea, lake, and river ice and recrystallized snow, as well as buried blocks of glacier ice in permafrost climate. World estimates of the amount of ice in permafrost vary from 200,000 to 500,000 cubic kilometres (49,000 to 122,000 cubic miles), or less than 1 percent of the total volume of the Earth. It has been estimated that 10 percent by volume of the upper 3 metres of permafrost on the northern Coastal Plain of Alaska is composed of foliated ground ice (ice wedges). Taber ice is the most extensive type of ground ice, and in places it represents 75 percent of the ground by volume. It is calculated that the pore and Taber ice content in the depth between 0.5 and 3 metres (surface to 0.5 metre is seasonally thawed) is 61 percent by volume, and between 3 and 9 metres it is 41 percent. The total amount of pingo ice is less than 0.1 percent of the permafrost. The total ice content in the permafrost of the Arctic Coastal Plain of Alaska is estimated to be 1,500 cubic kilometres, and below 9 metres most of that is present as pore ice. Ice wedges The most conspicuous and controversial type of ground ice in permafrost is that formed in large ice wedges or masses with parallel or subparallel foliation structures. Most foliated ice masses occur as wedge-shaped, vertical, or inclined sheets or dikes 2.5 centimetres to 3 metres wide and 0.3 to 9 metres high when viewed in transverse cross section. Some masses seen on the face of frozen cliffs may appear as horizontal bodies a few centimetres to 3 metres in thickness and 0.3 to 14 metres long, but the true shape of these ice wedges can be seen only in three dimensions. Ice wedges are parts of polygonal networks of ice enclosing cells of frozen ground 3 to 30 metres or more in diameter. Origins The origin of ground ice was first studied in Siberia, and discussions in print of the origin of large ground-ice masses in perennially frozen ground of North America have gone on since Otto von Kotzebue recorded ground ice in 1816 at a spot now called Elephant\u2019s Point in Eschscholtz Bay of Seward Peninsula. The theory for the origin of ice wedges now generally accepted is the thermal contraction theory that, during the cold winter, polygonal thermal contraction cracks, a centimetre or two wide and a few metres deep, form in the frozen ground; then when, in early spring, water from the melting snow runs down these tension cracks and freezes, a vertical vein of ice is produced that penetrates into permafrost; when the permafrost warms and re-expands during the following summer, horizontal compression produces upturning of the frozen sediment by plastic deformation; then during the next winter, renewed thermal tension reopens the vertical ice-cemented crack, which may be a zone of weakness; another increment of ice is added in the spring when meltwater again enters and freezes. Over the years the vertical wedge-shaped mass of ice is produced. Active wedges, inactive wedges, and ice-wedge casts Ice wedges may be classified as active, inactive, and ice-wedge casts. Active ice wedges are those that are actively growing. The wedge may not crack every year, but during many or most years cracking does occur, and an increment of ice is added. Ice wedges require a much more rigorous climate to grow than does permafrost. The permafrost table must be chilled to \u221215 to \u221220 \u00b0C (5 to \u22124 \u00b0F) for contraction cracks to form. On the average, it is assumed that ice wedges generally grow in a climate where the mean annual air temperature is \u22126 or \u22128 \u00b0C (21 or 18 \u00b0F) or colder. In regions with a general mean annual temperature only slightly warmer than \u22126 \u00b0C, ice wedges occasionally form in restricted cold microclimate areas or during cold periods of a few years\u2019 duration. The area of active ice wedges appears to roughly coincide with the continuous permafrost zone. From north to south across the permafrost area in North America, a decreasing number of wedges crack frequently. The line dividing zones of active and inactive ice wedges is arbitrarily placed at the position where it is thought most wedges do not frequently crack. Inactive ice wedges are those that are no longer growing. The wedge does not crack in winter and, therefore, no new ice is added. A gradation between active ice wedges and inactive ice wedges occurs in those wedges that crack rarely. Inactive ice wedges have no ice seam or crack extending from the wedge upward to the surface in the spring. The wedge top may be flat, especially if thawing has lowered the upper surface of the wedge at some time in the past. Ice wedges in the world are of several ages, but none appear older than the onset of the last major cold period, about 100,000 years ago. Wedges dated by radiocarbon analyses range from 3,000 to 32,000 years in age. In many places in the now temperate latitudes of the world, in areas of past permafrost, ice wedges have melted, and resulting voids have been filled with sediments collapsing from above and the sides. These ice-wedge casts are important as paleoclimatic indicators and indicate a climate of the past with at least a mean annual air temperature of \u22126 or \u22128 \u00b0C or colder. Page 1 of 2 Next page Surface manifestations of permafrost and seasonally frozen ground Learn More in these related Britannica articles: glacial landform: Permafrost, patterned ground, solifluction deposits, and pingos Permafrost is ground that remains perennially frozen (see permafrost). It covers about 20\u201325 percent of the Earth\u2019s land surface today. The \u201cactive layer\u201d of soil close to the surface of permafrost regions undergoes many seasonal and daily freeze-thaw\u2026 Canada: Tundra The permafrost (persistently frozen ground) is easily damaged by heavy equipment and by oil spills. The Inuit, who fish, hunt, and trap for a living, are directly affected by abuses of the ecology.\u2026 Arctic: Terrain Permanently frozen ground (permafrost) covers nearly one-quarter of the Earth\u2019s surface. In northern Alaska and Canada scattered observations suggest that permafrost is 800 to 1,500 feet deep; it is generally deeper in northern Siberia. The deepest known permafrost is in northern Siberia, where it exceeds 2,000 feet. The\u2026 North America: Temperature \u2026has permanently frozen subsoil (permafrost) and is under snow and ice most of the year. The frequently frozen seas interlacing the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, together with innumerable northern lakes, allow for an enormous chilling effect on the air above, and the temperatures for these huge regions are 6 to\u2026 global warming: Carbon cycle feedbacks \u2026of the warming of Arctic permafrost (on land) and further methane release at the continental margins of the oceans (a few hundred metres below sea level). The current average atmospheric methane concentration of 1,750 ppb is equivalent to 3.5 gigatons (3.5 billion tons) of carbon. There are at least 400\u2026 ADDITIONAL MEDIAMore About Permafrost14 references found in Britannica articlesAssorted Referenceshydrates In hydrateice formation In ice formationperiglacial landforms In glacial landform: Permafrost, patterned ground, solifluction deposits, and pingosPleistocene Epoch In Pleistocene Epoch: Periglacial environmentspolar barrens and tundra In tundra: Soils In tundra: Effects of human activities and climate change In polar ecosystem: Polar environmentspotential methane emission In global warming: Carbon cycle feedbackspresence in Gelisol In Gelisoltaiga In taiga: SoilsView More Additional Reading Article History Article Contributors Feedback Corrections? Updates? Help us improve this article! Contact our editors with your feedback. Permafrost Quick Facts View Media Page related topicsIce formation Pingo Thermokarst Pingo ice Inactive ice wedge Hydrolaccolith Open-system pingo Ice-wedge cast Active ice wedge Closed-system pingo Similar Topics Glacier Iceberg Ice in lakes and rivers Sea ice Polynya Ice jam Pack ice Featured On Britannica Unbound / History Britannica Celebrates Women\u2019s History Month Quiz / Literature & Language The Bront\u00eb Sisters Companion / Science The Anthropocene Epoch: Adding Humans to the Chart of Geologic Time Demystified / Science What Causes the Northern and Southern Lights? Britannica Lists & Quizzes Science Quiz Biodiversity Loss Animals List Gorilla gorilla, Sula sula, and Other Animals Whose Names Are Tautonyms\u2014the Same for Genus and Species History Quiz Women\u2019s History: Famous Firsts History List Military Commanders of World War I Trending Topics Crystal Palace Victoria Monroe Doctrine Kepler's laws of planetary motion Open Door policy Black Death F. Scott Fitzgerald James Watt Agricultural Adjustment Administration Mexican Revolution Connect with Britannica Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Pinterest IntroductionDistribution in the Northern HemispherePermafrost zonesStudy of permafrostOrigin and stability of permafrostAir temperature and ground temperatureClimatic changeLocal thicknessEffects of climateEffects of water bodiesEffects of solar radiation, vegetation, and snow coverIce contentTypes of ground iceIce wedgesOriginsActive wedges, inactive wedges, and ice-wedge castsSurface manifestations of permafrost and seasonally frozen groundAreas underlain by permafrostPolygonal groundThermokarst formationsPingosFeatures related to seasonal frostPatterned groundSoil flowProblems posed by permafrostPermafrost engineeringGeneral issuesPermafrost thawing and frost heavingDevelopment in permafrost areasStructures on pilesHighways and railroadsAgricultureOffshore structures Edit Mode Permafrost Geology Tips for Editing Leave Edit Mode Submit Tips For Editing We welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. You can make it easier for us to review and, hopefully, publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind. Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience. You may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered. Any text you add should be original, not copied from other sources. At the bottom of the article, feel free to list any sources that support your changes, so that we can fully understand their context. (Internet URLs are the best.) Your contribution may be further edited by our staff, and its publication is subject to our final approval. Unfortunately, our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions. Submit Thank You for Your Contribution! Our editors will review what you've submitted, and if it meets our criteria, we'll add it to the article. Please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors, and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed. Uh Oh There was a problem with your submission. Please try again later. Close Keep Exploring Britannica Volcano Volcano, vent in the crust of the Earth or another planet or satellite, from which issue eruptions of\u2026 Read this Article Fascism Fascism, political ideology and mass movement that dominated many parts of central, southern, and eastern\u2026 Read this Article English language English language, West Germanic language of the Indo-European language family that is closely related\u2026 Read this Article View More Stay Connected Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Pinterest Newsletters About Us About Our Ads Partner Program Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use \u00a92019 Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica, Inc. Menu Home Demystified Quizzes Galleries Lists On This Day Biographies Newsletters Login Join Contents Contents Page 1 of 2 Permafrost geology Article Media Print Print Please select which sections you would like to print: Table Of Contents Cite Share SHARE Facebook Twitter Feedback Feedback Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login). Select feedback type: Select a type (Required) Factual Correction Spelling/Grammar Correction Link Correction Additional Information Other Submit Feedback If you prefer to suggest your own revision of the article, you can go to edit mode (requires login). Thank you for your feedback Our editors will review what you\u2019ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. Join Britannica's Publishing Partner Program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work! Share SHARE Facebook Twitter Search \u00d7 close Britannica Celebrates 100 Women Trailblazers", "Permamelt: 500,000-Year History of Permafrost Reveals Further Warming of 1.5\u00b0C Would \u2018Thaw Significant Regions\u2019 \u2013 ThinkProgress Latest Stories Newsletter MASTHEAD Donate Membership Contact Us ABOUT ClimateProgress Search icon Search icon Close icon Facebook Twitter Youtube Instagram Search icon Close icon Search icon Latest Stories Think Progress Header Logo Facebook Twitter Youtube Instagram Hamburger icon Close icon Topics Menu Video ClimateProgress Politics SCOTUS Health Care World More Menu Open More Menu ABOUT MASTHEAD Tips Newsletter Membership DONATE ADVERTISE Contact Us Advertisement Permamelt: 500,000-Year History of Permafrost Reveals Further Warming of 1.5\u00b0C Would \u2018Thaw Significant Regions\u2019 Joe Romm Feb 26, 2013, 11:09 pm SHARE Facebook Twitter Email SMS WhatsApp Share Last fall, a major study found that the carbon feedback from thawing permafrost will likely add 0.4\u00b0F\u200a\u2014\u200a1.5\u00b0F to total global warming by 2100. That was based on climate modeling. A new study looks at the paleo-climate record and comes to an equally worrisome conclusion\u200a\u2014\u200aJR. Caves point to thawing of\u00a0Siberia Oxford University news releaseEvidence from Siberian caves suggests that a global temperature rise of 1.5 degrees Celsius could see permanently frozen ground thaw over a large area of Siberia, threatening release of carbon from soils, and damage to natural and human environments. A thaw in Siberia\u2019s permafrost (ground frozen throughout the year) could release over 1000 giga-tonnes of the greenhouse gases carbon dioxide and methane into the atmosphere, potentially enhancing global warming. AdvertisementThe data comes from an international team led by Oxford University scientists studying stalactites and stalagmites from caves located along the \u2018permafrost frontier\u2019, where ground begins to be permanently frozen in a layer tens to hundreds of metres thick. Because stalactites and stalagmites only grow when liquid rainwater and snow melt drips into the caves, these formations record 500,000 years of changing permafrost conditions, including warmer periods similar to the climate of today. Records from a particularly warm period (Marine Isotopic Stage 11) that occurred around 400,000 years ago suggest that global warming of 1.5\u00b0C compared to the present is enough to cause substantial thawing of permafrost far north from its present-day southern limit. A report of the research is published in this week\u2019s Science Express. The team included scientists from Britain, Russia, Mongolia and Switzerland. \u2018The stalactites and stalagmites from these caves are a way of looking back in time to see how warm periods similar to our modern climate affect how far permafrost extends across Siberia,\u2019 said Dr Anton Vaks of Oxford University\u2019s Department of Earth Sciences, who led the work. \u2018As permafrost covers 24% of the land surface of the Northern hemisphere significant thawing could affect vast areas and release giga-tonnes of carbon. \u2018This has huge implications for ecosystems in the region, and for aspects of the human environment. For instance, natural gas facilities in the region, as well as power lines, roads, railways and buildings are all built on permafrost and are vulnerable to thawing. Such a thaw could damage this infrastructure with obvious economic implications.\u2019 AdvertisementThe team used radiometric dating techniques to date the growth of cave formations (stalactites and stalagmites). Data from the Ledyanaya Lenskaya Cave\u200a\u2014\u200anear the town of Lensk latitude 60\u00b0N\u200a\u2014\u200ain the coldest region showed that the only period when stalactite growth took place occurred about 400,000 years ago, during a period with a global temperature 1.5\u00b0C higher than today. Periods when the world was 0.5\u20131\u00b0C warmer than today did not see any stalactite growth in this northernmost cave, suggesting that around 1.5\u00b0C is the \u2018tipping point\u2019 at which the coldest permafrost regions begin to thaw. Dr Vaks said: \u201cAlthough it wasn\u2019t the main focus of our research our work also suggests that in a world 1.5\u00b0C warmer than today, warm enough to melt the coldest permafrost, adjoining regions would see significant changes with Mongolia\u2019s Gobi Desert becoming much wetter than it is today and, potentially, this extremely arid area coming to resemble the present-day Asian steppes.\u201d \u2014 Oxford University news release Related Posts: Nature: Climate Experts Warn Thawing Permafrost Could Cause 2.5 Times the Warming of Deforestation! NSIDC: Thawing permafrost feedback will turn Arctic from carbon sink to source in the 2020s, releasing 100 billion tons of carbon by 2100 NOAA: Climate Change Driving Arctic Into A \u2018New State\u2019 With Rapid Ice Loss And Record Permafrost Warming RealClimate Is Alarmed by Arctic Methane, Should You Be? #Climate, #Climate Change About Masthead Careers Pitch Us Tips Contact Us Newsletter Membership Donate Advertise Think Progress Footer Logo Facebook Twitter Youtube Instagram \u00a9 2019 ThinkProgress Powered by WordPress.com VIP", "Permafrost | Alaska Centers Skip to main content Your guide to experiencing Alaska's Public Lands Search form Search using USASearch Toggle Font Size Toggle OpenDyslexic Open Menu Your guide to experiencing Alaska's Public Lands Alaska Centers Destinations Cities Anchorage Fairbanks Juneau Ketchikan Tok Regions Northwest & Arctic Interior Southwest Southcentral Southeast Parks, Refuges & Forests Discover Alaska's Parks, Forests and Refuges Plan an Adventure Learn & Explore Things to Do Hiking & Backpacking Cycling Floating All-Terrain Vehicle Riding Hunting & Fishing Beach Combing & Tidepooling Collecting Fossils & Artifacts Recreational Gold Mining Winter Activities Activities for Kids Teacher Resources Attractions Wildlife Glaciers Permafrost Hot Springs Aurora Borealis Midnight Sun The Trans-Alaska Pipeline Dalton Highway Multimedia Culture & Science Alaska's History Cultural Heritage Dog Mushing Paleontology Natural Phenomena Climate Change Ice Worms Find Amazing Wildlife & More Explore Culture and History Trip Planning Itineraries Travel By Road By Rail By Ferry By Air Download Maps for Your Trip Lodging, Passes & Permits Public Cabins Public Campgrounds Park Passes Hunting and Fishing Licenses Safety & Stewardship Safety Fires Outdoor Gear Checklists Stewardship of Public Lands: Do Your Part Widlife Etiquette Invasive Species Download Maps for Your Trip Explore Culture and History Our Visitors' Centers Anchorage Directions Calendar Daily Programs Movies Ranger-Led Walking Tours Summer Programs for Kids Teacher Resources FAQs Fairbanks Directions Calendar Newsfeed Movies Teacher Resources FAQs Ketchikan Directions Calendar Exhibits Films Children's Programs Teacher Resources FAQs Tok Directions Calendar Children's Programs Teacher Resources FAQs Work With Us! Student Conservation Association Park Ranger Teacher Ranger Teacher Youth Conservation Corps Explore the Unknown Beauty is Right Off the Road Search form Search using USASearch Destinations Cities Anchorage Fairbanks Juneau Ketchikan Tok Regions Northwest & Arctic Interior Southwest Southcentral Southeast Parks, Refuges & Forests Discover Alaska's Parks, Forests and Refuges Plan an Adventure Learn & Explore Things to Do Hiking & Backpacking Cycling Floating All-Terrain Vehicle Riding Hunting & Fishing Beach Combing & Tidepooling Collecting Fossils & Artifacts Recreational Gold Mining Winter Activities Activities for Kids Teacher Resources Attractions Wildlife Glaciers Permafrost Hot Springs Aurora Borealis Midnight Sun The Trans-Alaska Pipeline Dalton Highway Multimedia Culture & Science Alaska's History Cultural Heritage Dog Mushing Paleontology Natural Phenomena Climate Change Ice Worms Find Amazing Wildlife & More Explore Culture and History Trip Planning Itineraries Travel By Road By Rail By Ferry By Air Download Maps for Your Trip Lodging, Passes & Permits Public Cabins Public Campgrounds Park Passes Hunting and Fishing Licenses Safety & Stewardship Safety Fires Outdoor Gear Checklists Stewardship of Public Lands: Do Your Part Widlife Etiquette Invasive Species Download Maps for Your Trip Explore Culture and History Our Visitors' Centers Anchorage Directions Calendar Daily Programs Movies Ranger-Led Walking Tours Summer Programs for Kids Teacher Resources FAQs Fairbanks Directions Calendar Newsfeed Movies Teacher Resources FAQs Ketchikan Directions Calendar Exhibits Films Children's Programs Teacher Resources FAQs Tok Directions Calendar Children's Programs Teacher Resources FAQs Work With Us! Student Conservation Association Park Ranger Teacher Ranger Teacher Youth Conservation Corps Explore the Unknown Beauty is Right Off the Road Home / Learn & Explore / Attractions / Permafrost Share Facebook Twitter Google+ LinkedIn Delicious Digg Reddit StumbleUpon Pinterest In This Section Things to DoAttractionsWildlifeGlaciersPermafrostHot SpringsAurora BorealisMidnight SunThe Trans-Alaska PipelineDalton Highway DiscoveriesMultimediaCulture & Science FAQ / People Often Ask Can we see Denali from Anchorage? Yes, on a very clear day, you can see Denali, which is Koyukon Athabascan for \"The Great One\", all the way from Anchorage. The distance between Denali and Anchorage is approximately 130 miles by air and approximately 225 miles by car. It is best to get up high, like on the top level of any of the parking garages in downtown Anchorage or a top floor of one of the many hotels. If you are on the Tony Knowles Coastal Trail, you should be able to see Denali at Point Woronzof, Eathquake Park, and Resolution Park but, again, only if the day is very clear. What information can you give me on Alaska State Parks? The Alaska Centers has the Alaska State Parks brochures listing camping and facility information, individual State Parks, some specific hiking, canoeing, and public use cabin information. The Anchorage Information Center also sells State Park annual day use parking passes. The Fairbanks Information Center sells the State Park annual day use pass and the State Parks annual boat launch pass. I want to take a day long cruise, where do I go? That depends on what you want in a cruise. The two most popular cruise departure points close to Anchorage are Whittier and Seward. Whittier offers great views of glaciers and some wildlife, while Seward offers lots of opportunities for viewing all sorts of wildlife, including whales. Further away but still drivable are Homer (great for wildlife) and Valdez (great for glaciers and whales). Stay Safe Find important safety tips & and guides on: How to Protect Yourself from Mosquitoes and Pests Mudflat Safety: Steer Clear! Avalanche Safety in Alaska Permafrost NPS Frozen Alaska One of Alaska's natural wonders is found underfoot. It is permafrost, ground that remains frozen year after year. Made up of soil and rocks as well as frozen water, permafrost forms when the depth of winter freezing exceeds the depth of summer thawing. Permafrost is thickest in arctic Alaska north of the Brooks Range, but it is found to some extent beneath nearly 85 percent of Alaska. On the arctic coastal plain it extends as much as 2,000 feet below the surface and is found virtually everywhere. From the Brooks Range southward its thickness gradually decreases and it becomes more and more discontinuous, broken by taliks, pockets of unfrozen ground. Near Anchorage, permafrost is found only in isolated patches, and in Southeast Alaska it is found only high in the mountains. Much of the permafrost in Alaska is tens of thousands of years old. In arctic and interior Alaska, river erosion and gold mining have revealed the remains of now-extinct animals from the last great ice age 100,000 to 10,000 years ago, when animals such as woolly mammoths, mastodons, lions, and saber-toothed cats roamed what is now Alaska. Pingos and ice wedges are demonstrations of how permafrost has changed the landscape. Many of the grasses, flowers, and berries of the arctic tundra owe their existence to the presence of permafrost. With only a few inches of precipitation a year, arctic Alaska could well be a barren desert. But permafrost forms a frozen floor beneath seasonally thawed ground, which can be from several inches to a few feet deep. Rainfall and snowmelt cannot percolate or drain off. Instead, water collects at surface, providing moisture to nourish plants and forming innumerable shallow lakes and ponds. Tundra plants, in turn, insulate the permafrost beneath them from thawing. They seal out the warm temperatures and sunlight of summer so the permafrost remains frozen. Melting of permafrost can pose problems for humans and their activities. If overlying vegetation is removed or disturbed, its insulating qualities are lost and the permafrost begins to melt. Waterlogged ground becomes soft and collapses. Buildings and roads may slump or tilt, and vehicles bog down in mud. Alaskans have developed innovative techniques for building on permafrost so it will not melt. Houses in permafrost areas are frequently built on pilings so they will not transfer heat to the ground. Floors may be insulated. Water and sewer pipes are installed above ground. Engineering for the Trans Alaska Pipeline was complicated by the fact that three-fourths of the line, which carries oil at temperatures between 82 - 116 degrees Fahrenheit, would extend across land underlain by permafrost. To prevent melting of the permafrost, more than half the pipeline was built aboveground on elevated supports, some of which are refrigerated. In places where buried pipe extends across unstable permafrost, it is wrapped with insulation, and in a few locations the pipe is insulated and buried in refrigerated ditches. Permafrost Area With Spruce Trees USFWS Is Alaska Melting? Studies of permafrost in Alaska are providing valuable information about the potential effects of global warming. One project at the University of Alaska Fairbanks Geophysical Institute has been monitoring temperatures and depth of permafrost since 1976. Precise temperature measurements have been made in a series of holes bored 200 feet deep along a line running north to south down the middle of the state along the Trans-Alaska Pipeline. Study results show that much of the undisturbed discontinuous permafrost south of the Yukon River has warmed significantly and some of it is thawing. That raises the possibility that roads, buildings, and other structures on thawed areas will collapse. Another problem could arise as well: As permafrost thaws it can release methane and carbon dioxide, gases that contribute to the green house effect and accelerate global warming. Find more information on these studies. Map of permafrost. NSIDC Where to See Alaska's Permafrost In Northern and Interior Alaska, permafrost is frequently visible along riverbanks or road cuts. It is most obvious where large wedges or lenses of ice have been cut perpendicular to the ground such as a river or road cutting through the soil. Where the Dalton Highway crosses the Yukon River, daily tourist boat trips give people a look at exposed permafrost along the riverbank. Effects of permafrost melting can also be seen on many roads and highways in Interior Alaska. Watch for rough, wavy road surfaces and highway signs warning of \"Dips.\" An area recommended by Tom Osterkamp of the Geophysical Institute can be seen along the Parks Highway from Nenana to Denali National Park. Buildings tilted because of melting permafrost can be seen along Farmer's Loop Road near Fairbanks. You can see above-ground water and sewer pipes in Barrow and Bethel. The map above illustrates where the permafrost is across the state. Permafrost and Climate Change Permafrost Monitoring in the Arctic Permafrost Laboratory What is a Pingo? Note: This Embedded video resides on the official Alaska National Park YouTube channel What are ice wedges and polygons? Note: This Embedded video resides on the official Alaska National Park YouTube channel Our Partners Alaska Department of Commerce and Economic DevelopmentAlaska Department of Fish & GameAlaska Department of Natural ResourcesAlaska Department of Transportation & Public FacilitiesBureau of Land ManagementNational Park ServiceUnited States Fish and Wildlife ServiceUnited States Forest ServiceUnited States Geological Survey Alaska Public Land Information Centers About APLIC Contact Us U.S. Department of the InteriorUSA GovNo Fear ActPrivacy PolicyFOIADisclaimerAccessibilityNoticesSitemap Back to Top", "Permafrost (story) - Wikipedia Permafrost (story) From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jump to navigation Jump to search \"Permafrost\"AuthorRoger ZelaznyGenre(s)Science fictionPublisherOmniPublication dateApril 1986 \"Permafrost\" is a science fiction novelette by American writer Roger Zelazny, published in 1986. Contents 1 Plot summary 2 Reception 3 References 4 External links Plot summary[edit] A strange confrontation between a frozen planet, a formerly-human program, and a has-been con-man. Reception[edit] \"Permafrost\" won the 1987 Hugo Award for Best Novelette in 1987,[1] and was nominated for the 1986 Nebula Award for Best Novelette.[2] Mike Ashley has described it as a \"complex tale of confrontation\".[3] References[edit] ^ 1987 Hugo Awards, at TheHugoAwards.org; retrieved June 20, 2017 ^ 1986 Nebula Awards, at Science Fiction Writers of America; retrieved June 20, 2017 ^ Science Fiction Rebels: The Story of the Science-Fiction Magazines from 1981 to 1990, by Mike Ashley; published December 31, 2015, by Oxford University Press External links[edit] Permafrost title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database vteHugo Award for Best NoveletteRetro Hugos \"Rule 18\" by Clifford D. Simak (1939) \"The Roads Must Roll\" by Robert A. Heinlein (1941) \"Foundation\" by Isaac Asimov (1943) \"First Contact\" by Murray Leinster (1946) \"The Little Black Bag\" by Cyril M. Kornbluth (1951) \"Earthman, Come Home\" by James Blish (1954) 1955\u20131960 \"The Darfsteller\" by Walter M. Miller, Jr. (1955) \"Exploration Team\" by Murray Leinster (1956) \"The Big Time\" by Fritz Leiber (1958) \"The Big Front Yard\" by Clifford D. Simak (1959) 1967\u20131980 \"The Last Castle\" by Jack Vance (1967) \"Gonna Roll the Bones\" by Fritz Leiber (1968) \"The Sharing of Flesh\" by Poul Anderson (1969) \"Goat Song\" by Poul Anderson (1973) \"The Deathbird\" by Harlan Ellison (1974) \"Adrift Just Off the Islets of Langerhans: Latitude 38\u00b0 54' N, Longitude 77\u00b0 00' 13\" W\" by Harlan Ellison (1975) \"The Borderland of Sol\" by Larry Niven (1976) \"The Bicentennial Man\" by Isaac Asimov (1977) \"Eyes of Amber\" by Joan D. Vinge (1978) \"Hunter's Moon\" by Poul Anderson (1979) \"Sandkings\" by George R. R. Martin (1980) 1981\u20131990 \"The Cloak and the Staff\" by Gordon R. Dickson (1981) \"Unicorn Variation\" by Roger Zelazny (1982) \"Fire Watch\" by Connie Willis (1983) \"Blood Music\" by Greg Bear (1984) \"Bloodchild\" by Octavia E. Butler (1985) \"Paladin of the Lost Hour\" by Harlan Ellison (1986) \"Permafrost\" by Roger Zelazny (1987) \"Buffalo Gals, Won't You Come Out Tonight\" by Ursula K. Le Guin (1988) \"Schr\u00f6dinger's Kitten\" by George Alec Effinger (1989) \"Enter a Soldier. Later: Enter Another\" by Robert Silverberg (1990) 1991\u20132000 \"The Manamouki\" by Mike Resnick (1991) \"Gold\" by Isaac Asimov (1992) \"The Nutcracker Coup\" by Janet Kagan (1993) \"Georgia on My Mind\" by Charles Sheffield (1994) \"The Martian Child\" by David Gerrold (1995) \"Think Like a Dinosaur\" by James Patrick Kelly (1996) \"Bicycle Repairman\" by Bruce Sterling (1997) \"We Will Drink a Fish Together...\" by Bill Johnson (1998) \"Taklamakan\" by Bruce Sterling (1999) \"1016 to 1\" by James Patrick Kelly (2000) 2001\u2013present \"Millennium Babies\" by Kristine Kathryn Rusch (2001) \"Hell Is the Absence of God\" by Ted Chiang (2002) \"Slow Life\" by Michael Swanwick (2003) \"Legions in Time\" by Michael Swanwick (2004) \"The Faery Handbag\" by Kelly Link (2005) \"Two Hearts\" by Peter S. Beagle (2006) \"The Djinn's Wife\" by Ian McDonald (2007) \"The Merchant and the Alchemist's Gate\" by Ted Chiang (2008) \"Shoggoths in Bloom\" by Elizabeth Bear (2009) \"The Island\" by Peter Watts (2010) \"The Emperor of Mars\" by Allen Steele (2011) \"Six Months, Three Days\" by Charlie Jane Anders (2012) \"The Girl-Thing Who Went Out for Sushi\" by Pat Cadigan (2013) \"The Lady Astronaut of Mars\", by Mary Robinette Kowal (2014) \"The Day the World Turned Upside Down\" by Thomas Olde Heuvelt (2015) \"Folding Beijing\" by Hao Jingfang (2016) \"The Tomato Thief\" by Ursula Vernon (2017) \"The Secret Life of Bots\" by Suzanne Palmer (2018) This article about a science fiction short story (or stories) is a stub. You can help Wikipedia by expanding it.vte Retrieved from \"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Permafrost_(story)&oldid=786611840\" Categories: Short stories by Roger ZelaznyHugo Award for Best Novelette winning works1986 short storiesScience fiction short story stubsHidden categories: All stub articles Navigation menu Personal tools Not logged inTalkContributionsCreate accountLog in Namespaces ArticleTalk Variants Views ReadEditView history More Search Navigation Main pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia store Interaction HelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact page Tools What links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this page Print/export Create a bookDownload as PDFPrintable version Languages Polski Edit links This page was last edited on 20 June 2017, at 14:13\u00a0(UTC). Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia\u00ae is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization. Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Developers Cookie statement Mobile view", "permafrost | Infoplease Search ToolsAtlasEncyclopediaDictionaryThesaurusDaily AlmanacVideos Top 10s Timelines World Atlas Countries News History Geography Structures & Buildings World Rulers Disasters Flags of the World Statistics International Relations Travel Religion U.S. Fifty States Cities News History Geography Buildings & Structures Disasters Statistics Military Gender Issues Race & Ethnicity Postal Information Arts & Entertainment Sports People Academia & Culture Arts & Entertainment Business Government Newsmakers Science Sports History & Gov't World History U.S. History Timelines U.S. Presidents U.S. Government U.S. Elections U.S. Supreme Court U.S. Monuments & Landmarks U.S. Documents Science & Health Astronomy & Space Aviation Environment & Energy Health Inventions Life Science Physical Science Technology Weather Weights & Measures Calendar & Holidays Calendars Seasons, Months, Days Holiday Features Holidays Business Business Consumer Resources Economy Employment & Labor Personal Finance Poverty & Income Taxes Ask the Editors Breadcrumb Home > Columbia Encyclopedia > Earth and the Environment > Geology and Oceanography > Geology and Oceanography > permafrost Cite permafrost Enter your search terms: permafrost, permanently frozen soil, subsoil, or other deposit, characteristic of arctic and some subarctic regions; similar conditions are also found at very high altitudes in mountain ranges. In 1962 measurements in a borehole drilled on Melville Island, Northwest Territories, Canada, showed that the ground was frozen to a depth of at least 1,475 ft (450 m); comparable thicknesses have been found in other far north regions. Tundras , though underlaid by permafrost, today support centers of population in Alaska, Canada, and Siberia. Permafrost is a very fragile system that may easily be damaged or destroyed by the presence of human-generated heat. A controversy developed in the late 1960s and early 70s over the construction of an oil pipeline from the Alaska North Slope to the southern part of the state. Critics of the project argued that if the pipeline containing hot oil ever came into contact with the permafrost, it would melt the permafrost; the pipeline would then sink and eventually break. The oil spilled during the breakage would result in a major ecological disaster. It was decided to build the pipeline with insulated pipe raised above the permafrost or on gravel beds in order to prevent melting and thus preserve both the pipeline and the ecosystem. The Columbia Electronic Encyclopedia, 6th ed. Copyright \u00a9 2012, Columbia University Press. All rights reserved. See more Encyclopedia articles on: Geology and Oceanography ADVERTISEMENT Featured Videos ADVERTISEMENT Daily AlmanacVideo\u00a0LibraryCalculatorPlace FinderPeriodic TablePerpetual CalendarHomework HelpSpelling CheckerDistance CalculatorConversion ToolYear by YearCurrent EventsFact Monster Games Footer Popular Areas 50 States Country Profiles Encyclopedia Dictionary Thesaurus Year-by-Year Homework Center Watch and Learn FEN Learning FamilyEducation TeacherVision Fact Monster About Infoplease,Part of FEN Learning Footer last column RSS Contact Terms of Use Privacy Site Map Partnerships Affiliate Links Disclaimer \u00a9 2000\u20132018\u00a0Sandbox Networks, Inc., publishing as Infoplease", "In Alaska's Thawing Permafrost, Humanity's 'Library Is on Fire' | InsideClimate News Skip to main content Home About Contact Reporting Network Newsletter Sign-Up Whistleblowers Awards Membership Donate A Pulitzer Prize-winning, non-profit, non-partisan news organization dedicated to covering climate change, energy and the environment. Menu News InvestigationsDangers Without Borders Harvesting Peril Choke Hold Exxon: The Road Not Taken The Dilbit Disaster Big Oil + Bad Air Clean Break Bloomberg's Hidden Legacy Keystone & Beyond Meltdown: Terror at the Top of the World Topics Today's Climate Clean Economy Videos InfographicsInfographics Documents EBooks Home About Contact Reporting Network Newsletter Sign-Up Whistleblowers Awards Membership Donate Hot Topics: Arctic Agriculture Military Clean Energy Climate Science Extreme Weather Exxon Investigation Home In Alaska's Thawing Permafrost, Humanity's 'Library Is on Fire' Rising Arctic temperatures are destroying ancient artifacts once preserved in the frozen ground and taking a toll on native traditions that depend on the sea ice. By Sabrina Shankman Nov 30, 2017 This story was co-published with The Weather Channel. The Internet connection is bad. As Herman Ahsoak speaks into his iPhone, the video chat freezes periodically, his face fixed in strange contortions on the screen. Ahsoak is in Utqiagvik, Alaska, formerly known as Barrow, the northernmost community in the United States; he is speaking to a class of high school students in Kaktovik, the only community within the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, more than 300 miles east. A member of the Inupiaq, whose people have lived on the North Slope for thousands of years, Ahsoak is demonstrating how to make an ulu\u2014a knife used to skin and clean animals. \"My father, when I was coming of age, he would make these in our living room,\" he says, his hands expertly attaching a caribou antler handle to the curved blade. \"I just happened to pay attention.\" Herman Ahsoak teaches students by video chat how to make an ulu, a knife traditionally used by subsistence hunters to skin and butcher animals. Credit: Sabrina Shankman Ahsoak is a whaling captain and subsistence hunter, and he has ulus for all occasions: for walrus, for belugas, and for the bowhead whales that he and other members of his community hunt each fall and spring. But in Kaktovik, which is also an Inupiat community where people live off the food they hunt, the making of ulus has become nearly a lost art; most of the people who knew the craft have died or left. As the video feed stutters, the students take notes diligently while Ahsoak's voice carries through the line. Things have changed on the North Slope since Ahsoak, 53, was a boy. It's been decades since the dog teams were replaced by all-terrain vehicles and snowmobiles, and graffiti on the side of one house in Utqiagvik gives a shout-out to the Wu-Tang Clan. But it's the changes in the environment that are the most profound: With temperatures rising faster in the Arctic than anywhere else in the world with emissions from carbon dioxide and short-lived climate pollutants such as methane and black carbon, the very ground on which communities are built is slumping as the permafrost thaws, and the sea ice that sustains vital animal populations is melting earlier and re-forming later than ever before. Less sea ice means stronger storms and bigger waves, and villages across the region are at risk of falling into the sea as each year coastal erosion eats away at the shoreline. As Ahsoak works to preserve Inupiaq culture, the physical world that shaped that culture is facing an urgent threat. That's the context in which the archaeologist Anne Jensen, a native of upstate New York who arrived in Utqiagvik 22 years ago, is at work on another project of cultural preservation. The\u00a0Ukpea\u0121vik I\u00f1upiat Corporation\u00a0(UIC), the local native corporation, hired her in the 1990s to help preserve and learn about archaeological sites in the area. Every summer, Jensen and a crew of volunteers venture out to remote areas, sleeping in tents to excavate sites that are hundreds or thousands of years old. It was on one of these digs in the early 2000s that Jensen and Ahsoak first crossed paths\u2014he worked as a logistics coordinator and bear guard as Jensen excavated a historical site on Point Barrow, learning about how Ahsoak's ancestors once lived. While their methods differ, Ahsoak and Jensen's missions in many ways align. And in climate change, they face a common obstacle. The homes, weapons, and even bodies that Jensen digs up are extraordinarily well preserved\u2014unlike archaeological sites elsewhere in the world, these pieces of history have been locked in ice. But as the permafrost thaws, so do these sites, and as erosion eats away at the coast, it's washing away the history locked inside it. Once gone, the story that these sites can tell, about food webs, migratory patterns, and traditional ways of life, will disappear too. Just as Ahsoak is working to preserve his community's traditions, Jensen is racing to capture this historical record before it's lost\u2014and, perhaps, to find in the region's past some answers for its future. Archaeologists who work in the Arctic, Jensen says, have a metaphor for what is happening. The Library of Alexandria was the most famous site for cultural knowledge and history in ancient Egypt, until it burned down, taking with it an irreplaceable record. The decomposition and disappearance of some of the world's best-preserved sites is much the same, she says: \"It's like the library is on fire.\" 'A Different Calculus' Picture an archaeologist at work: Your mind probably conjures an image of a scientist hunched over a sandy expanse or rocky outcropping, painstakingly sifting for artifacts, perhaps spending months or years on the same patch of earth. But Jensen's work, in the shifting, daunting conditions of the Arctic, requires \"a different calculus,\" she says. \"You're making choices about how to proceed as fast as possible without losing more data than necessary.\" Archeologist Anne Jensen has been working on cultural preservation projects in Utqiagvik for 22 years. The job has become more urgent as permafrost thaws. Credit: Sabrina Shankman The differences start with the permafrost, the layer of frozen ground that lies beneath the surface. In summer months, Jensen and a team of volunteers travel to dig sites, sleeping in tents and combating hordes of mosquitoes. They begin by opening the ground, giving the permafrost beneath a chance to thaw and soften. It's important to open a large enough area at the start. \"You can't suddenly decide halfway through the field season, 'Oh, I need to move another meter to the right,' she says. \"It's not going to thaw fast enough.\" The permafrost that holds artifacts trapped also acts as an extraordinary preservative\u2014the key to the region's archaeological value. A bone that is thousands of years old, Jensen says, can look \"like the animal died a few years ago.\" Because the sites are so well preserved, organic matter, such as animal remains, pelts and ancient plants, retains extractable DNA that can hold insights about the historical food web. Jensen believes this knowledge can be relevant today, as migratory routes and habitats shift in response to climate change and industrial development. Anne Jensen and her team have preserved a wide range of historic artifacts, including tools, sleds and houses, as well as ancient human and animal remains. Credit: Sabrina Shankman/InsideClimate News There are also clues, she says, in the human artifacts\u2014tools like the ulus Ahsoak still makes, sleds, even houses\u2014that she and her colleagues find across the Arctic. These artifacts are part of Inupiat cultural legacy, which is one reason the tribe employs Jensen to excavate these sites. They also hold lessons about how earlier inhabitants responded to changes in the environment: In the face of encroaching seas, did they move inland or relocate entirely? As their food sources shifted, did their quality of life change? What sorts of events spelled disaster for a community, and what were they able to survive? \"The course of history has been defined by big changes\u2014not as fast or severe as the ones we're seeing now\u2014but they caused changes,\" she says. \"You can start seeing what kinds of responses were attractive to people, and what actions did they take.\" There is urgency in her work to find lessons that may have contemporary relevance\u2014but also because many of the discoveries that remain are literally disappearing. The permafrost that has preserved these sites is thawing, and that process sets in motion bacterial and chemical decay. It's a death sentence for organic artifacts. Thomas McGovern, a professor of archaeology at Hunter College, has spent his career studying ancient Viking sites in Greenland, where the thawing of permafrost is even more advanced than in Alaska. A few years ago, graduate students working with McGovern went back to look at sites that had been well preserved. \"They started popping open holes and finding that the bone preservation is gone. It's just mush,\" he said. Jensen is starting to see the same sort of degradation near Utqiagvik. \"We're losing the organics,\" she said. \"That's the piece we're going to lose, and it's a huge piece.\" With less sea ice to protect the shoreline, coastal erosion is accelerating and unearthing historic artifacts. Credit: Sabrina Shankman Another challenge is even more pressing. Coastal erosion, a perpetual feature of life in the Arctic, is accelerating. Climate change produces stronger storms, less sea ice leads to bigger waves, and thawing permafrost means the ground breaks away more readily. Sometimes, erosion leads to new finds: The main site Jensen is working on now, called Walakpa, was partially excavated in the late 1960s, but in 2013, when part of a bluff fell into the ocean, an ancient house was exposed, opening up new research opportunities. But she has to work quickly. In the years she's been at Walakpa, Jensen says, 39 feet of the site have disappeared. Other sites across the region are simply gone\u2014one storm will expose a site, the next can wash it away. Last summer, as fieldwork was winding down, Jensen and her team discovered part of a polar bear skull. It was a significant find, because years earlier they had discovered a similar skull that was abnormally large, and possibly indicative of a new subspecies. But the earth around this skull was still frozen, locking it in in place. They resorted to drastic action\u2014boiling water, a portable heater, a tarp\u2014to soften the ground and remove the skull before leaving the site. It wasn't an option to wait until next year, she says. \"We won't know until we get back out there if that area will survive the winter.\" 'This Didn't Used to Happen at All' To see the changes in Utqiagvik, you don't have to walk any further than Herman Ahsoak's back door. One day in August, his backyard was pocked with gigantic puddles\u2014some more like small ponds\u2014where standing water from the rainiest summer anyone could remember sat atop frozen ground. A few steps out the door, whitefish were hanging out to dry, and a walrus skull soaked in a tub. Out in the yard, amid tall grass, the traditional skin boat he uses for the spring whaling season sat covered in plastic. He's had to start storing it that way in recent years as the weather has become warmer and more humid, Ahsoak explained, so that it doesn't get covered in mold. The frozen walls of Herman Ahsoak\u2019s ice cellar, where he stores whale meat after hunts, don\u2019t normally melt, but that\u2019s starting to change. Credit: Sabrina Shankman Wearing tall rubber boots, Ahsoak sloshed through the puddles until he reached his family's si\u0121luaq, or ice cellar. The si\u0121luaq plays a central role in North Slope subsistence hunting communities: After the whaling season, the animals' meat is stored in the ground, where it ferments before it is eaten. But that requires a cold cellar. As permafrost thaws, according to one local official, there are stories of meat going spoiled. When Ahsoak pried open the heavy wooden top, he could see slush around the cellar's base. \"That's quite surprising to see so much water in there,\" he said. \"This didn't used to happen at all.\" Like many people here, Ahsoak grew up with a deep respect for the traditions of his ancestors. Today, he is a prolific creator in the workshop of the local heritage center, an instructor who teaches classes on how to make ulus and traditional drums, and a de facto cultural ambassador to visitors in Utqiagvik, with a well-practiced explanation of the ins and outs of whaling. It's a way to remind people: This is who we are. This is why we matter. But in a subsistence culture, passing on skills and knowledge also has direct daily significance. The co-captains of Ahsoak's whaling crew are his 28-year-old niece, Flora, and his nephew, Jonas, who is also his harpooner. His twin boys, now 12, started joining him on the whale hunt when they were 10, first learning how to find the right kind of snow to melt for water, and now learning how to help butcher whales. Sea ice is changing as temperatures rise, leaving the next generation facing new challenges as they learn the traditions passed down from their ancestors. Credit: Sabrina Shankman \"You try to teach the boys and girls hunting terminology when you're out there with them: the ocean currents, the wind direction, the animals they're catching and the parts of the animal they're cutting up,\" he says. Jensen says, \"Whaling is a very traditional activity, and traditional knowledge transmission\u2014which Herman is keeping up\u2014was about participating: Watch and learn, listen and learn.\" The world that was the basis for that knowledge, though, is changing fast. Ahsoak grew up learning that the sea ice, which makes walrus and other animals accessible to hunters, would go through a period of melting and re-forming in the spring, before it disappeared for the summer. \"Nowadays, when the ice goes, we don't see it again,\" he says. Thick sea ice has also provided a surface to butcher bowhead whales, which can weigh 75 to 100 tons. During the last spring season, according to several whaling captains, thin ice broke beneath a whale's weight just as a storm was coming in. Fortunately, no one was hurt and the whaling crew was able to salvage the meat, but it was a lesson about the new reality that won't be forgotten soon. 'We Wonder How You Lived' When Herman Ahsoak was a boy, there was a long, gently sloped hill that ran down to the beach. It was a favorite sledding spot for local children\u2014\"the main attraction,\" he says with a smile. The site looks different now. It turns out Ahsoak and his friends\u2014and generations before them, too\u2014had been sledding over the frozen remains of their ancestors. The first discovery came in the early 1980s, when an eroding bluff uncovered a family from the 1800s that was frozen in the ground, apparently killed in a natural disaster. As the permafrost thawed, the well-preserved body of a young girl who lived in the area hundreds of years ago was discovered in an eroding bluff. Credit: Sabrina Shankman Then, in the mid-1980s, a powerful fall storm ripped through Utqiagvik, tearing off the face of an adjacent hill. Amid the broken pieces of permafrost was an unmistakable sight: a human foot, with a pale sliver of skin exposed above a still-intact mukluk. Before the site could be excavated, another storm hit Utqiagvik, ripping further into the bluff and taking the body, which had been nicknamed Uncle Foot, with it. A decade later, Jensen was visiting Utqiagvik before settling there, and she fielded a request to examine a new find at the site. Declining sea ice and an increase in storms had eroded the area further, exposing another mystery. This time, it began with the hood of a bird-skin parka that was sticking out of the ground. The parka covered the body of a young girl\u2014the best-preserved ever recovered in Alaska\u2014who had lived there sometime in the 1200s. Genetic testing revealed that the girl had suffered from a disease that made her an invalid, but that she was cared for by her community. At the request of the elders in the community, she was treated as a person, not a scientific specimen, so her autopsy and reburial was fast-tracked. She was buried with a letter from local children, who addressed her as \"Agnaiyaaq,\" or \"Dear Young Girl.\" \"You are very special and old,\" they wrote. \"We wonder how you lived.\" A few years ago, more human remains were found near the same location. The site has since been protected by sandbags and caution tape, but it's unclear if it will ever be fully excavated. There are fears that further digging could weaken the permafrost that supports a nearby road, and the waves below continue to crash closer. Anne Jensen and her team excavate an area where historic ruins were discovered in northern Alaska. Credit: Weather Channel Each year, warming temperatures, rising seas, and increasingly powerful storms take another bite into the history here\u2014and the present. If it's still possible for people in many corners of the world to ignore what scientists say is coming, in Utqiagvik, it's hard not to talk about climate change. It is, quite literally, everywhere you look. In their own ways, both Ahsoak and Jensen are trying to retain essential parts of the past, and help the community adapt to a new reality. Jensen also has another hope\u2014that this work might make climate change more immediate to the rest of the world, while there still might be some time left to do something about it. \"You can stand there and give people all sorts of data about sea level going up and whatnot, but it's really hard for people to envision what that means,\" Jensen says. \"The more you can bring people into the story\u2014actual once-living people\u2014the more people get it and relate to it. And then once they relate to it, they start thinking about, 'Oh that could be me, that could be us'.\" Top photo:\u00a0The Inupiaq have lived on the North Slope for thousands of years, relying on sea ice, whaling and the frozen ground. Credit: Sabrina Shankman Subscribe to InsideClimate News Email Newsletters Articles & Investigations Today's Climate Clean Economy Week in Review Subscribe More From The Author The U.S. Military Needed New Icebreakers Years Ago. A Melting Arctic Is Raising the National Security Stakes. By Sabrina Shankman U.S. Starts Process to Open Arctic to Offshore Drilling, Despite Federal Lawsuit By Sabrina Shankman Drier Autumns Are Fueling Deadly California Wildfires By Sabrina Shankman More by Sabrina Shankman Whistleblowers Jobs & Freelance Privacy Policy & Legal Our E-Books Keep Environmental Journalism Alive Donate Now News Investigations Topics Today's Climate Clean Economy Videos Infographics EBooks Facebook Twitter Google Plus Email LinkedIn RSS RSS Instagram YouTube", "Why Thawing Permafrost Matters News from the Earth Institute Menu Agriculture Climate Earth Sciences Ecology Energy Health Sustainability Urbanization Water Climate, Earth Sciences Why Thawing Permafrost Matters by Renee Cho|January 11, 2018 Comments Permafrost thaw ponds in Canada. Photo: Steve Jurvetson In Bethel, Alaska, walls are splitting, houses are collapsing, and the main road looks like a kiddy rollercoaster. In the coastal town of Kongiganak, sinking cemeteries prevent Alaskans from burying their dead in the ground. The village of Shishmaref, located on an island five miles from the western Alaska mainland, has eroded so much that it is contemplating total relocation.\u00a0These communities are being plagued by permafrost that is thawing. Permafrost\u00a0is ground that remains frozen for two or more consecutive years. It is composed of rock, soil, sediments, and varying amounts of ice that bind the elements together. Some permafrost has been frozen for tens or hundreds of thousands of years. Found under a layer of soil, permafrost can be from three feet to 4,900 feet thick. It stores the carbon-based remains of plants and animals that froze before they could decompose. Scientists estimate that the world\u2019s permafrost holds 1,500 billion tons of carbon, almost double the amount of carbon that is currently in the atmosphere. Unfortunately, when permafrost warms and thaws, it releases carbon dioxide and methane into the atmosphere. As the global thermostat rises, permafrost, rather than storing carbon, could become a significant source of planet-heating emissions. Thawing permafrost. Photo: NPS Climate Change Response Permafrost is already thawing in some places, and if the problem spreads, scientists worry it could initiate a runaway process of global warming. The Warming Arctic Permafrost covers about 24 percent of the exposed landmass of the Northern Hemisphere\u2014about 9 million square miles. It is found at high latitudes and high altitudes, mainly in Siberia, the Tibetan Plateau, Alaska, Northern Canada, Greenland, parts of Scandinavia and Russia. The continental shelves below the Arctic Ocean, which were exposed during the last ice age, also contain permafrost. However, polar and high altitude regions are some the most climate-sensitive places on the planet. The Arctic is warming twice as fast as the rest of the planet, at a rate of temperature change that has not been observed in at least the last 2,000 years, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). In 2016, annual average surface temperatures were 3.5 degrees Celsius warmer than they were at the start of the 20th century. That year, permafrost temperatures in the Arctic were the warmest ever recorded. In Alaska, permafrost temperatures have warmed as much as 2\u02daC in the last few decades. A recent study\u00a0projects that with every 1\u02daC increase in temperature, 1.5 million square miles of permafrost could be lost through thawing. When Permafrost Thaws O. Roger Anderson, a biologist at the Earth Institute\u2019s Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, explained why permafrost releases carbon as it thaws. Coastal erosion reveals permafrost underlying the active layer in Alaska. Photo: Brandt Meixell, USGS The \u2018active layer\u2019 of soil on top of the permafrost, which may be two to 13 feet deep, thaws each summer and can sustain plant life. This layer releases carbon from the roots of plants that respire out CO2, and from microbes in the soil. Some microbes break down the organic matter into CO2. Others, called archaea, produce methane instead, when conditions are anaerobic\u2014when the soil is saturated with water or no oxygen is available. Methane is 20 to 30 times more potent than carbon dioxide at exacerbating global warming, but it remains in the atmosphere for less time. As permafrost thaws, the active layer deepens. The microbes become active and plant roots can penetrate further down, resulting in the production of more CO2. The amount of methane generated depends on how saturated the ground is. Scientists don\u2019t know the relative proportions of carbon dioxide and methane emissions that might result from largescale thawing permafrost, said Anderson, because this has never happened in human history. However, research on the upper layer of the tundra (treeless plains overlying the permafrost) suggests that the average carbon dioxide emissions are about 50 times higher than those of methane. \u201cAnd we know that for every 10 degrees Celsius that the soil warms up, the emission of CO2 will double,\u201d said Anderson. A 2017 study estimated that if global temperatures rise 1.5\u02daC above 1861 levels, thawing permafrost could release 68 to 508 gigatons of carbon. Without factoring in human activity, this carbon alone would increase global temperatures 0.13 to1.69\u02daC by 2300. Since we may have already locked in 1.5\u02daC of warming above pre-industrial levels, this amount of additional warming could result in catastrophic impacts of climate change. Although a warmer Arctic could support more plants, and plants absorb carbon dioxide through photosynthesis, the new growth is projected to offset only about 20 percent of the permafrost\u2019s carbon release. What Protects Permafrost One thing that protects permafrost from the impacts of climate change is peat, the partly decayed vegetation that accumulates in water-saturated environments with no oxygen. Found in much of the low Arctic, peat can overlie or encompass the whole active layer or be frozen as permafrost. Peat on the tundra. Photo: Ben Gaglioti Ben Gaglioti, a postdoctoral research scientist at Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, studied lake sediment records in northern Alaska to determine how much carbon the permafrost released in response to warming periods at the end of the last ice age. It turns out that the permafrost was much more sensitive\u2014meaning it released more carbon\u2014during past warming events, with gradually less response over time. In the most recent 150 years of warming, there has been relatively little response. Peat over ice. Photo: Ben Gaglioti \u201cOur hypothesis is that the buildup of organic matter or peat in the watershed has occurred because of a relatively warm and stable climate since the ice age,\u201d said Gaglioti. \u201cThat peat, which started accumulating around 13,000 years ago, does a great job at insulating the underlying ground from thaw, so we think it\u2019s buffering the permafrost.\u201d Gaglioti\u2019s models show that the sensitivity of the underlying permafrost is highly dependent on the thickness of the peat. \u201cThe fate of the underlying permafrost rests in some ways on the stability of the peat layer,\u201d he said. An Irreversible Cycle? Wildfires can peel back the peat and make permafrost more sensitive to climate change\u2014and they\u2019re expected to increase in tundra regions, Gaglioti said. Warmer and drier summers make vegetation more combustible. Warmer temperatures also bring about more thunderstorms and lightning strikes that can spark wildfires. Fire near Ivotuk, AK. Photo: Ben Gaglioti Fires not only release CO2 as they burn; afterwards, the blackened ground absorbs more solar radiation and warms further. And once fire removes the peat and vegetation that shades the ground, the landscape can become too well-drained to regenerate the peat. Many scientists are concerned that thawing permafrost could be a tipping point that triggers an irreversible cycle: When permafrost releases its carbon as CO2 or methane, it will accelerate warming, which will then precipitate more permafrost thaw, and so on. There will be nothing humans can do to stop it. The regions where permafrost is frozen year-round are already shifting northwards; and in some areas, the tundra now freezes later in the fall, allowing more time for microbes to decompose organic matter and for plants to respire. Impacts of Thawing Permafrost When the ice in permafrost melts, the ground becomes unstable and can slump, causing rock and landslides, floods and coastal erosion. Thawing permafrost can damage buildings as it collapses. Photo: Amanda Graham The ground has collapsed 280 feet deep in some parts of Siberia. The buckling earth can damage buildings, roads, power lines and other infrastructure. It can also harm natural ecosystems. Thermokarst lakes\u2014depressions formed when thawing permafrost collapsed and filled with meltwater\u2014are important for wildlife and provide water to local communities. But if the underlying permafrost continues to thaw, lakes and wetlands can drain completely, destroying these biologically important resources. As the sediments from landslides muddy streams and lakes, they affect plant life at the base of the food chain and potentially all the creatures that depend on it. Changes in the landscape can alter caribou breeding and migration patterns. And as the Arctic warms, beavers are moving northward. Their dams flood new areas, creating boggy stretches that allow for more warm water to thaw permafrost further. Thawing permafrost can release more than carbon emissions. In 2016, a young boy died and dozens were hospitalized after contracting anthrax on the Yamal Peninsula in Siberia. An anthrax-infected reindeer carcass that froze 75 years earlier became exposed when the permafrost thawed. Anthrax spores entered the soil and water, and eventually the food supply, infecting the humans. Bison frozen in permafrost. Photo: Johanna Anjar People and animals and their diseases have been frozen in the permafrost for hundreds of years, but bacteria and viruses can survive in permafrost for hundreds of thousands of years\u2014scientists recently revived a 30,000-year-old virus that infects amoebas. Diseases like the Spanish flu, smallpox or the plague that have been wiped out might be frozen in the permafrost. As the Arctic warms, more activity, like mining for rare earth or precious metals, could potentially put us in contact with them again. Building on permafrost is problematic, not only because the ground is unstable, but because the heat of buildings and pipes themselves can warm permafrost. Structures must be built on wood piles or based on thick gravel pads. Water and sewer pipes must be placed above ground. Some Bethel roads and airport runways are outfitted with liquid-filled pipes that transfer heat away from the permafrost, and the hospital has installed machines that keep the ground constantly refrigerated. In Inuvik, a town in northwestern Canada, researchers are experimenting with new varieties of pilings to stabilize buildings, but they haven\u2019t yet found a perfect solution. They say it\u2019s hard to know what will work best because no one in the Arctic has ever experienced the rate of permafrost change that is occurring today. Many Questions Remain While the most recent Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change\u2019s\u00a0report\u00a0acknowledged that permafrost is warming, its climate models did not account for these emissions when making climate projections. That\u2019s because ultimately, how much the planet warms from thawing permafrost will depend on how much carbon is released, how quickly, and whether it is in the form of CO2 or methane. But to get a fuller understanding of this phenomenon and to be able to make more accurate climate projections, scientists need to be able to better assess the vulnerability of permafrost to thawing and its many consequences for the Arctic and the planet. \u201cScientific research is so important in understanding,\u201d said Anderson. \u201cWe just can\u2019t predict from what\u2019s already known because we\u2019ve never had permafrost thawing previously to this extent. It\u2019s only through more careful scientific research that we can answer these questions.\u201d Get our newsletter I'd like to get more stories like this. Email address Secure and Spam free... Tags: Arcticclimate changeCO2Global WarmingLamont-Doherty Earth Observatorymethanepermafrostthawing permafrost Related Posts Is Climate Change Already Making Hurricanes Stronger? Scientists Track Deep History of Planets\u2019 Motions, and Effects on Earth\u2019s Climate One thought on \u201cWhy Thawing Permafrost Matters\u201d Renee Cho says: February 6, 2018 at 10:09 am New research reveals that Arctic permafrost is full of mercury, a neurotoxin that is harmful to human health. Thawing permafrost could release it into the environment. https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/energy-environment/wp/2018/02/05/the-arctic-is-full-of-toxic-mercury-and-climate-change-is-going-to-release-it/?utm_term=.5fdc611badfe Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *Comment Name * Email * Website Search for: Featured Story Banning Plastic Bags, Town by Town: a Guide Tweets by earthinstitute Upcoming Events MS in Sustainability Management and Sustainability Certification Online Information Session Python User Group: Extracting Data from APIs TopicsTopics Select Category Agriculture Climate Earth Sciences Ecology Education Energy Gender Equality General Earth Institute Health Natural Disasters Poverty / Development Press Release Sustainability Urbanization Water Research Centers & Programs Climate MattersLamont-Doherty Earth ObservatoryMasters in Development PracticeWater Matters Authors Advanced Consortium on Cooperation, Conflict, and ComplexityAdam FischerAdrian SoghoianAlyssa RomeAvantika GoswamiAlice GraffAlex HallidayAdrienne KenyonAllison LadueAlejandra BorundaAlex FischerAllison GreenbergAnna MazhirovAmy McDermottRoger AndersonAndrea BascheAngelie SinghArif NooriAshley CurtisHuili ZhuAdam SobelAnnie TickellAdam YukelsonRobert S. ChenBenjamin PrestonBrian KahnBob AndersonCassie XuCathy VaughanColumbia Center on Sustainable InvestmentCatherine FullertonCenter for International Earth Science Information NetworkColumbia Water CenterCenter for Research on Environmental DecisionsCari ShimkusCourtney SmallCourtney St. JohnDebbie CookDebra TillingerDavid FunkhouserDavida HellerDiana B SierraDavid MaurrasseDonna ShillingtonDiego VillarrealDwi SusantoEarth InstituteEve WarburtonEinat LevCenter on Global Energy PolicyEric HolthausElizabeth RobinsonEmily RothenbergEve SolomonElisabeth SydorFarah HegaziKyle FrischkornFrancesco FiondellaFrank NitscheGina AckermanGavin SchmidtElisabeth GawthropGeoffrey HealGilma MantillaGisela WincklerGrant GoodrichHamsa SubramaniamHannah ChangHima BataviaHayley MartinezIndrani DasInternational Research Institute for Climate and SocietyIvy MorganJaclyn Leigh CarlsenJames WarieroJessica CrespoJeffrey SachsJennifer VettelJesper FrantJessica FanzoJeremy HinsdaleJill A. VanTongerenJim CochranJim GahertyJonathan NicholsJohn McArthurJohn MutterJu Young LeeJulia Apland HitzJulie ArrighiKatherine AllenKalpana VenkatasubramanianKate BrashKate MorrisKate WeinbergerKatherine ReganKatie HornerKatie JohnsonKavita Jain-CocksKelsie DeFranciaKelsey DyezKevin KrajickKate Kennedy FreemanKim Anne KastensKim MartineauKlaus LacknerKristin FrancozKatherine SchulmanKirsty TintoKyu LeeKathy ZhangLakis PolycarpouLareef ZubairLaura LyLauren BarredoLauren ZieglerLenfest CenterLonnie ThompsonLaura PirainoLindsay SiegelLucia RodriguezMadeleine RubensteinMargie TurrinMariapaola SuttoMarie DeNoia AronsohnMary-Elena CarrMattias ChesleyMeaghan DalyMelika EdquistMeg ReitzMegan WinstonMeghna BhattacharjeeMichael B. GerrardMichael BarnettMichelle CordrayMichelle ShevinMike StecklerMolly HellmuthMilap PatelMarivi Perdomo CabaMeg TowleMargo WeissNatalie Unwin-KuruneriNikhil NarulaNatalia MrozNeil PedersonNathan RudderPaola MejiaPatrick KinneyPaul BlockPeter ColemanPeter KelemenPeter SchlosserPatty MechaelPratigya PolissarPoonam AroraPhebe PiersonPrabhjot DhadiallaPrabhjot SinghPamela VreelandRenee ChoRebecca FowlerRonny FriedrichRebecca GreenwaldRichard GonzalezRichard PlunzBob CroccoRobert HsuRustom MasalawalaSabin Center for Climate Change LawSamantha TressSarah BrennanSarah Wakefield AdhyaSuzanne CarbotteThomas ChenScott BarrettSelim TliliSarah FechtShahid NaeemShahzeen Z. AttariSidney HemmingSharon KimStacy MorfordSamantha OstrowskiShama PerveenBeth StaufferStephanie RuizStephen HammerStephen YangSteve CohenSarah TweedieSusan BlausteinSusan KarutiTanya HeikkilaTheresa E. HernandezTim CreytsTim CroneTimothy GildnerTobias SiegfriedTamara PlummerTristan JonesTracy SlagleTrevor WilliamsUyen Kim HuynhUjala QadirUpmanu LallWilliam MenkeYanis Ben AmorYochanan KushnirYombo Tankoano Archives Select Year 2019 \u00a0(78) 2018 \u00a0(436) 2017 \u00a0(370) 2016 \u00a0(396) 2015 \u00a0(415) 2014 \u00a0(383) 2013 \u00a0(334) 2012 \u00a0(508) 2011 \u00a0(511) 2010 \u00a0(549) 2009 \u00a0(285) 2008 \u00a0(11) State of the Planet is a forum for discussion on varying viewpoints. The opinions expressed by the authors and those providing comments are theirs alone, and do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the Earth Institute or Columbia University. Earth Institute, Columbia University Ask a Question / Suggest a Story Get our newsletter Sign me up for the Earth Institute newsletter, so I can receive more stories like this. Email address This website uses cookies as well as similar tools and technologies to understand visitors' experiences. By continuing to use this website, you consent to Columbia University's usage of cookies and similar technologies, in accordance with the Columbia University Website Cookie Notice.Close", "BBC - Earth - There are diseases hidden in ice, and they are waking up HomepageAccessibility linksSkip to contentAccessibility HelpBBC AccountNotificationsHomeNewsSportWeatheriPlayerSoundsCBBCCBeebiesFoodBitesizeEarthArtsMake It DigitalTasterLocalTomorrow's WorldTVRadioMenuSearchSearch the BBCSearch the BBC Earth Menu Home Attenborough's Story of Life Big Questions Discoveries Video Earth by email About us Extreme Life Bacteria There are diseases hidden in ice, and they are waking up Long-dormant bacteria and viruses, trapped in ice and permafrost for centuries, are reviving as Earth's climate warms Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on Reddit Share on WhatsApp Share on Google+ Share by Email Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on Reddit Share on StumbleUpon Share on Google+ Share by Email By Jasmin Fox-Skelly 4 May 2017 Throughout history, humans have existed side-by-side with bacteria and viruses. From the bubonic plague to smallpox, we have evolved to resist them, and in response they have developed new ways of infecting us.We have had antibiotics for almost a century, ever since Alexander Fleming discovered penicillin. In response, bacteria have responded by evolving antibiotic resistance. The battle is endless: because we spend so much time with pathogens, we sometimes develop a kind of natural stalemate.However, what would happen if we were suddenly exposed to deadly bacteria and viruses that have been absent for thousands of years, or that we have never met before?We may be about to find out. Climate change is melting permafrost soils that have been frozen for thousands of years, and as the soils melt they are releasing ancient viruses and bacteria that, having lain dormant, are springing back to life. View image of Reindeer (Rangifer tarandus) migrating (Credit: Eric Baccega/naturepl.com) In August 2016, in a remote corner of Siberian tundra called the Yamal Peninsula in the Arctic Circle, a 12-year-old boy died and at least twenty people were hospitalised after being infected by anthrax.The theory is that, over 75 years ago, a reindeer infected with anthrax died and its frozen carcass became trapped under a layer of frozen soil, known as permafrost. There it stayed until a heatwave in the summer of 2016, when the permafrost thawed.This exposed the reindeer corpse and released infectious anthrax into nearby water and soil, and then into the food supply. More than 2,000 reindeer grazing nearby became infected, which then led to the small number of human cases.The fear is that this will not be an isolated case. View image of Permafrost in Svalbard (Credit: Wild Wonders of Europe/de la L/naturepl.com) As the Earth warms, more permafrost will melt. Under normal circumstances, superficial permafrost layers about 50cm deep melt every summer. But now global warming is gradually exposing older permafrost layers.Frozen permafrost soil is the perfect place for bacteria to remain alive for very long periods of time, perhaps as long as a million years. That means melting ice could potentially open a Pandora's box of diseases.The temperature in the Arctic Circle is rising quickly, about three times faster than in the rest of the world. As the ice and permafrost melt, other infectious agents may be released.\"Permafrost is a very good preserver of microbes and viruses, because it is cold, there is no oxygen, and it is dark,\" says evolutionary biologist Jean-Michel Claverie at Aix-Marseille University in France. \"Pathogenic viruses that can infect humans or animals might be preserved in old permafrost layers, including some that have caused global epidemics in the past.\"In the early 20th Century alone, more than a million reindeer died from anthrax. It is not easy to dig deep graves, so most of these carcasses are buried close to the surface, scattered among 7,000 burial grounds in northern Russia.However, the big fear is what else is lurking beneath the frozen soil. View image of Anthrax spores can survive for decades (Credit: Cultura RM/Alamy) People and animals have been buried in permafrost for centuries, so it is conceivable that other infectious agents could be unleashed. For instance, scientists have discovered fragments of RNA from the 1918 Spanish flu virus in corpses buried in mass graves in Alaska's tundra. Smallpox and the bubonic plague are also likely buried in Siberia.In a 2011 study, Boris Revich and Marina Podolnaya wrote: \"As a consequence of permafrost melting, the vectors of deadly infections of the 18th and 19th Centuries may come back, especially near the cemeteries where the victims of these infections were buried.\" NASA scientists successfully revived bacteria that had been encased in a frozen pond in Alaska for 32,000 years For instance, in the 1890s there was a major epidemic of smallpox in Siberia. One town lost up to 40% of its population. Their bodies were buried under the upper layer of permafrost on the banks of the Kolyma River. 120 years later, Kolyma's floodwaters have started eroding the banks, and the melting of the permafrost has speeded up this erosion process.In a project that began in the 1990s, scientists from the State Research Center of Virology and Biotechnology in Novosibirsk have tested the remains of Stone Age people that had been found in southern Siberia, in the region of Gorny Altai. They have also tested samples from the corpses of men who had died during viral epidemics in the 19th Century and were buried in the Russian permafrost.The researchers say they have found bodies with sores characteristic of the marks left by smallpox. While they did not find the smallpox virus itself, they have detected fragments of its DNA.Certainly it is not the first time that bacteria frozen in ice have come back to life. View image of Bacteria have been found dormant in Antarctic ice (Credit: Colin Harris/Era Images/Alamy) In a 2005 study, NASA scientists successfully revived bacteria that had been encased in a frozen pond in Alaska for 32,000 years. The microbes, called Carnobacterium pleistocenium, had been frozen since the Pleistocene period, when woolly mammoths still roamed the Earth. Once the ice melted, they began swimming around, seemingly unaffected. Once they were revived, the viruses quickly became infectious Two years later, scientists managed to revive an 8-million-year-old bacterium that had been lying dormant in ice, beneath the surface of a glacier in the Beacon and Mullins valleys of Antarctica. In the same study, bacteria were also revived from ice that was over 100,000 years old.However, not all bacteria can come back to life after being frozen in permafrost. Anthrax bacteria can do so because they form spores, which are extremely hardy and can survive frozen for longer than a century.Other bacteria that can form spores, and so could survive in permafrost, include tetanus and Clostridium botulinum, the pathogen responsible for botulism: a rare illness that can cause paralysis and even prove fatal. Some fungi can also survive in permafrost for a long time.Some viruses can also survive for lengthy periods. View image of Mimivirus, an example of a giant virus (Credit: Science Photo Library/Alamy) In a 2014 study, a team led by Claverie revived two viruses that had been trapped in Siberian permafrost for 30,000 years. Known as Pithovirus sibericum and Mollivirus sibericum, they are both \"giant viruses\", because unlike most viruses they are so big they can be seen under a regular microscope. They were discovered 100ft underground in coastal tundra.Once they were revived, the viruses quickly became infectious. Fortunately for us, these particular viruses only infect single-celled amoebas. Still, the study suggests that other viruses, which really could infect humans, might be revived in the same way. The giant viruses tend to be very tough and almost impossible to break open What's more, global warming does not have to directly melt permafrost to pose a threat. Because the Arctic sea ice is melting, the north shore of Siberia has become more easily accessible by sea. As a result, industrial exploitation, including mining for gold and minerals, and drilling for oil and natural gas, is now becoming profitable.\"At the moment, these regions are deserted and the deep permafrost layers are left alone,\" says Claverie. \"However, these ancient layers could be exposed by the digging involved in mining and drilling operations. If viable virions are still there, this could spell disaster.\"Giant viruses may be the most likely culprits for any such viral outbreak.\"Most viruses are rapidly inactivated outside host cells, due to light, desiccation, or spontaneous biochemical degradation,\" says Claverie. \"For instance, if their DNA is damaged beyond possible repair, the virions will no longer be infectious. However, among known viruses, the giant viruses tend to be very tough and almost impossible to break open.\" View image of Neanderthals once lived in Siberia (Credit: The Natural History Museum/Alamy) Claverie says viruses from the very first humans to populate the Arctic could emerge. We could even see viruses from long-extinct hominin species like Neanderthals and Denisovans, both of which settled in Siberia and were riddled with various viral diseases. Remains of Neanderthals from 30-40,000 years ago have been spotted in Russia. Human populations have lived there, sickened and died for thousands of years. NASA scientists found 10-50,000-year-old microbes inside crystals in a Mexican mine \"The possibility that we could catch a virus from a long-extinct Neanderthal suggests that the idea that a virus could be 'eradicated' from the planet is wrong, and gives us a false sense of security,\" says Claverie. \"This is why stocks of vaccine should be kept, just in case.\"Since 2014, Claverie has been analysing the DNA content of permafrost layers, searching for the genetic signature of viruses and bacteria that could infect humans. He has found evidence of many bacteria that are probably dangerous to humans. The bacteria have DNA that encodes virulence factors: molecules that pathogenic bacteria and viruses produce, which increase their ability to infect a host.Claverie's team has also found a few DNA sequences that seem to come from viruses, including herpes. However, they have not as yet found any trace of smallpox. For obvious reasons, they have not attempted to revive any of the pathogens.It now seems that pathogens cut off from humans will emerge from other places too, not just ice or permafrost. View image of The crystals in the Naica cave (Credit: SOTK2011/Alamy) In February 2017, NASA scientists announced that they had found 10-50,000-year-old microbes inside crystals in a Mexican mine. The bacteria have somehow become resistant to 18 types of antibiotics The bacteria were located in the Cave of the Crystals, part of a mine in Naica in northern Mexico. The cave contains many milky-white crystals of the mineral selenite, which formed over hundreds of thousands of years.The bacteria were trapped inside small, fluid pockets of the crystals, but once they were removed they revived and began multiplying. The microbes are genetically unique and may well be new species, but the researchers are yet to publish their work.Even older bacteria have been found in the Lechuguilla Cave in New Mexico, 1,000ft underground. These microbes have not seen the surface for over 4 million years. View image of Selenite formations in Lechuguilla Cave (Credit: Paul D. Stewart/naturepl.com) The cave never sees sunlight, and it is so isolated that it takes about 10,000 years for water from the surface to get into the cave. Antibiotic resistance has been around for millions or even billions of years Despite this, the bacteria have somehow become resistant to 18 types of antibiotics, including drugs considered to be a \"last resort\" for fighting infections. In a study published in December 2016, researchers found that the bacteria, known as Paenibacillus sp. LC231, was resistant to 70% of antibiotics and was able to totally inactivate many of them.As the bacteria have remained completely isolated in the cave for four million years, they have not come into contact with people or the antibiotic drugs used to treat human infections. That means its antibiotic resistance must have arisen in some other way.The scientists involved believe that the bacteria, which does not harm humans, is one of many that have naturally evolved resistance to antibiotics. This suggests that antibiotic resistance has been around for millions or even billions of years. View image of Permafrost on the Tibetan plateau (Credit: Gertrud & Helmut Denzau/naturepl.com) Obviously, such ancient antibiotic resistance cannot have evolved in the clinic as a result of antibiotic use.The reason for this is that many types of fungi, and even other bacteria, naturally produce antibiotics to gain a competitive advantage over other microbes. That is how Fleming first discovered penicillin: bacteria in a petri dish died after one became contaminated with an antibiotic-excreting mould. As Earth warms northern countries will become more susceptible to outbreaks of \"southern\" diseases like malaria In caves, where there is little food, organisms must be ruthless if they are to survive. Bacteria like Paenibacillus may have had to evolve antibiotic resistance in order to avoid being killed by rival organisms.This would explain why the bacteria are only resistant to natural antibiotics, which come from bacteria and fungi, and make up about 99.9% of all the antibiotics we use. The bacteria have never come across man-made antibiotics, so do not have a resistance to them.\"Our work, and the work of others, suggests that antibiotic resistance is not a novel concept,\" says microbiologist Hazel Barton of the University of Akron, Ohio, who led the study. \"Our organisms have been isolated from surface species from 4-7 million years, yet the resistance that they have is genetically identical to that found in surface species. This means that these genes are at least that old, and didn't emerge from the human use of antibiotics for treatment.\"Although Paenibacillus itself is not harmful to humans, it could in theory pass on its antibiotic resistance to other pathogens. However, as it is isolated beneath 400m of rock, this seems unlikely.Nevertheless, natural antibiotic resistance is probably so prevalent that many of the bacteria emerging from melting permafrost may already have it. In line with that, in a 2011 study scientists extracted DNA from bacteria found in 30,000-year-old permafrost in the Beringian region between Russia and Canada. They found genes encoding resistance to beta-lactam, tetracycline and glycopeptide antibiotics. View image of Permafrost tundra in Siberia (Credit: Staffan Widstrand/naturepl.com) How much should we be concerned about all this?One argument is that the risk from permafrost pathogens is inherently unknowable, so they should not overtly concern us. Instead, we should focus on more established threats from climate change. For instance, as Earth warms northern countries will become more susceptible to outbreaks of \"southern\" diseases like malaria, cholera and dengue fever, as these pathogens thrive at warmer temperatures.The alternative perspective is that we should not ignore risks just because we cannot quantify them.\"Following our work and that of others, there is now a non-zero probability that pathogenic microbes could be revived, and infect us,\" says Claverie. \"How likely that is is not known, but it's a possibility. It could be bacteria that are curable with antibiotics, or resistant bacteria, or a virus. If the pathogen hasn't been in contact with humans for a long time, then our immune system would not be prepared. So yes, that could be dangerous.\" Follow BBC Earth Facebook Twitter Youtube Instagram Explore the BBCHomeNewsSportWeatheriPlayerSoundsCBBCCBeebiesFoodBitesizeEarthArtsMake It DigitalTasterLocalTomorrow's WorldTVRadio Terms of UseAbout the BBCPrivacy PolicyCookiesAccessibility HelpParental GuidanceContact the BBCGet Personalised NewslettersCopyright \u00a9 2019 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.", "permafrost | National Geographic Society Who We AreAbout UsOur ExplorersOur HistoryOur LeadershipOur NewsroomWhat We DoProjects Big Cats InitiativeLast Wild PlacesOkavango Wilderness ProjectOut of Eden WalkPhoto ArkPhoto CampPlastics: Source to SeaPristine SeasSumatran Rhino RescueAll Impact ProgramsEducation Classroom ResourcesProfessional DevelopmentStudent ExperiencesBlogGrant ProgramsTechnology and InnovationD.C. Events & ExhibitionsOur ImpactOur AwardsOur BlogGet InvolvedGive to the SocietyAttend an Event or ExhibitionApply for a GrantGet UpdatesFOLLOW USTwitterFacebookGoogle+ Sign In Sign InCreate an AccountDonateEducationClassroom ResourcesResource LibraryMappingExplorer MagazineProfessional DevelopmentOnline CoursesEducator NetworkGrants for EducatorsGrosvenor Teacher FellowshipStudent ExperiencesGeoBeeGeoChallengeExplorer ClassroomStudent MatineesBlogEducationHomeClassroom ResourcesProfessional DevelopmentStudent ExperiencesBlogDonateWho We AreAbout UsOur ExplorersOur HistoryOur LeadershipOur NewsroomWhat We DoProjects HOMEBig Cats InitiativeLast Wild PlacesOkavango Wilderness ProjectOut of Eden WalkPhoto ArkPhoto CampPlastics: Source to SeaPristine SeasSumatran Rhino RescueAll Impact ProgramsEducation HOMEClassroom ResourcesProfessional DevelopmentStudent ExperiencesBlogGrant ProgramsTechnology and InnovationD.C. Events & ExhibitionsOur ImpactOur AwardsOur BlogGet InvolvedGive to the SocietyAttend an Event or ExhibitionApply for a GrantGet UpdatesFOLLOW USsearch Education EducationClassroom ResourcesProfessional DevelopmentStudent ExperiencesBlogsearchHomeNAT GEO SOCIETYWho We AreAbout UsOur ExplorersOur HistoryOur LeadershipOur NewsroomWhat We DoProjects HomeBig Cats InitiativeLast Wild PlacesOkavango Wilderness ProjectOut of Eden WalkPhoto ArkPhoto CampPlastics: Source to SeaPristine SeasSumatran Rhino RescueAll Impact ProgramsEducation HomeClassroom ResourcesProfessional DevelopmentStudent ExperiencesBlogGrant ProgramsTechnology and InnovationD.C. Events & ExhibitionsOur ImpactOur AwardsOur BlogGet InvolvedGive to the SocietyAttend an Event or ExhibitionApply for a GrantGet UpdatesFollow UsDonate Resource Library | Encyclopedic Entry permafrost Encyclopedic entry. Permafrost is a permanently frozen layer below the Earth\u2019s surface. It consists of soil, gravel, and sand, usually bound together by ice.Grades5 - 12, Higher EdSubjectsEarth science, Meteorology, Geography, Physical GeographyContents4 Photographs Twitter Facebook Google+ Google Classroom Email Print Encyclopedic Entry Vocabulary Permafrost is a permanently frozen layer below the Earths surface. It consists of soil, gravel, and sand, usually bound together by ice. Permafrost usually remains at or below 0C (32F) for at least two years. Permafrost can be found on land and below the ocean floor. It is found in areas where temperatures rarely rise above freezing. This means permafrost is often found in Arctic regions such as Greenland, the U.S. state of Alaska, Russia, China, and Eastern Europe. Permafrost thickness can range from 1 meter (3 feet) to more than 1,000 meters (3,281 feet). Permafrost covers approximately 22.8 million square kilometers (8.8 million square miles) in the Earth's Northern Hemisphere. Frozen ground is not always the same as permafrost. A layer of soil that freezes for more than 15 days per year is called \"seasonally frozen ground.\" A layer of soil that freezes between one and 15 days a year is called \"intermittently frozen ground.\" Permafrost is frozen for two years or more.Permafrost does not always form in one solid sheet. There are two major ways to describe its distribution: continuous and discontinuous. Continuous permafrost is just what it sounds like: a continuous sheet of frozen material. Continuous permafrost extends under all surfaces except large bodies of water in the area. The part of Russia known as Siberia has continuous permafrost.Discontinuous permafrost is broken up into separate areas. Some permafrost, in the shadow of a mountain or thick vegetation, stays all year. In other areas of discontinuous permafrost, the summer sun melts the permafrost for several weeks or months. The land near the southern shore of Hudson Bay, Canada, has discontinuous permafrost.Scientists who study permafrost are able to understand changes in the Earth's climate by observing changes in permafrost. Studies show the Earth's permafrost warmed by 6C during the 20th century. Scientists predict widespread melting of permafrost by 2100. Melting permafrost would raise water levels in the Earth's oceans and increase erosion. Erosion happens when permafrost melts because soil and sediment are easily washed away without the ice binding them together. Lakes and marshes in the Arctic are often shallow due to permafrost. Photograph by Mikaela Howie, MyShot Permafrost ArchitectureThough people do live in permafrost regions, such as Siberia, Canada, and Alaska, building on top of permafrost is difficult. Buildings raise the temperature of the ground beneath themwhich can melt permafrost and cause the building to sink in the mud. Engineers have found ways to build on top of permafrost without raising the ground temperature. These methods include building on top of wood piles or on top of thick gravel pads. Term Part of Speech Definition Encyclopedic Entry approximately Adjective generally or near an exact figure. Arctic Noun region at Earth's extreme north, encompassed by the Arctic Circle. Encyclopedic Entry: Arctic climate Noun all weather conditions for a given location over a period of time. Encyclopedic Entry: climate continuous permafrost Noun layer of soil that is permanently frozen. discontinuous permafrost Noun frozen layer of soil that thaws during the summer. erosion Noun act in which earth is worn away, often by water, wind, or ice. Encyclopedic Entry: erosion freezing Adjective at or below 0 degrees Celsius (32 degrees Fahrenheit). gravel Noun small stones or pebbles. ice Noun water in its solid form. Encyclopedic Entry: ice intermittently frozen ground Noun earth that freezes between one and fifteen days a year. mountain Noun landmass that forms as tectonic plates interact with each other. Northern Hemisphere Noun half of the Earth between the North Pole and the Equator. permafrost Noun permanently frozen layer of the Earth's surface. Encyclopedic Entry: permafrost sand Noun small, loose grains of disintegrated rocks. seasonally frozen ground Noun earth that freezes more than fifteen days a year, but less than two continuous years. sediment Noun solid material transported and deposited by water, ice, and wind. Encyclopedic Entry: sediment shadow Noun dark area where an object prevents light from reaching a surface. Siberia Noun region of land stretching across Russia from the Ural Mountains to the Pacific Ocean. soil Noun top layer of the Earth's surface where plants can grow. temperature Noun degree of hotness or coldness measured by a thermometer with a numerical scale. Encyclopedic Entry: temperature vegetation Noun all the plant life of a specific place. Articles & Profiles National Geographic News: Thawing Permafrost Could Supercharge Warming Websites International Permafrost Association: Find Out More About Permafrost Credits Media Credits The audio, illustrations, photos, and videos are credited beneath the media asset, except for promotional images, which generally link to another page that contains the media credit. The Rights Holder for media is the person or group credited. Writers Kim Rutledge Melissa McDaniel Diane Boudreau Tara Ramroop Santani Teng Erin Sprout Hilary Costa Hilary Hall Jeff Hunt Illustrators Tim Gunther Mary Crooks, National Geographic Society Editors Kara West Jeannie Evers, Emdash Editing Educator Reviewer Nancy Wynne Producer Caryl-Sue, National Geographic Society Sources Dunn, Margery G. (Editor). (1989, 1993). \"Exploring Your World: The Adventure of Geography.\" Washington, D.C.: National Geographic Society. Last Updated Feb. 15, 2011 User Permissions For information on user permissions, please read our Terms of Service. If you have questions about licensing content on this page, please contact ngimagecollection@natgeo.com for more information and to obtain a license. If you have questions about how to cite anything on our website in your project or classroom presentation, please visit our FAQ page. Media Some media assets (videos, photos, audio recordings and PDFs) can be downloaded and used outside the National Geographic website according to the Terms of Service. If a media asset is downloadable, a download button appears in the lower right hand corner () of the media viewer. If no button appears, you cannot download or save the media. Text Text on this page is printable and can be used according to our Terms of Service. Interactives Any interactives on this page can only be played while you are visiting our website. You cannot download interactives. Related Materials Key Concepts ice temperature arctic Northern Hemisphere soil permafrost Encyclopedia Quick FindA\u00a0B\u00a0C\u00a0D\u00a0E\u00a0F\u00a0G\u00a0H\u00a0I\u00a0J\u00a0K\u00a0L\u00a0M\u00a0N\u00a0O\u00a0P\u00a0Q\u00a0R\u00a0S\u00a0T\u00a0U\u00a0V\u00a0W\u00a0X\u00a0Y\u00a0Z Glossary Quick FindA\u00a0B\u00a0C\u00a0D\u00a0E\u00a0F\u00a0G\u00a0H\u00a0I\u00a0J\u00a0K\u00a0L\u00a0M\u00a0N\u00a0O\u00a0P\u00a0Q\u00a0R\u00a0S\u00a0T\u00a0U\u00a0V\u00a0W\u00a0X\u00a0Y\u00a0Z #Go to the Full Glossary \u00bb National Geographic Headquarters 1145 17th Street NW Washington, D.C. 20036 Connect About Us Newsroom Contact Us Careers at NGS Visit Our Museum Privacy Policy Sustainability Policy Terms of Service Code of Ethics Donate Get Updates Donate Get Updates Connect National Geographic Society is a 501 (c)(3) organization. \u00a9 1996 - 2019 National Geographic Society. All rights reserved. See our stories at NationalGeographic.com", "History of the International Permafrost Association - International Permafrost Association Arctic Portal AP Community Portlets Arctic Council Science Organizations Maps Library Acronyms Links Search International Permafrost Association Fostering permafrost research to the ends of the Earth Search ... Member login Contact \ufeff Menu HomeAbout Us Antarctic Permafrost and Periglacial EnvironmentsCoastal and Offshore Permafrost Dynamics (COPD)CryosolGlaciers and Permafrost Hazards in High Mountain Slopes (GAPHAZ)Isotopes and Geochemistry of PermafrostPeriglacial Landforms, Processes and ClimatePermafrost and Climate Modeling and Mapping Subgroup Planetary Permafrost and AstrobiologyPermafrost Engineering Subgroup on Engineering Geology for Development in Permafrost Regions Task Force on Remote SensingTask Force on Subglacial PermafrostStanding Committee on Data, Information and CommunicationsStanding Committee on Education and OutreachInternational Advisory Committee for ICOPCarbon Pools in Permafrost Regions (CAPP)Arctic Circumpolar Coastal Observatory Network (ACCONET)Arctic Coastal Dynamics (ACD)International Polar Year (2007-2009) OfficersCountry MembersConstitutionResolutionsExternal RelationsStanding Committees ANTPASEducation & Outreach HistoryBecome a Member Activities Action GroupsInterest Groups Permafrost and Carbon Budgets Core Projects PRP IPA Awards Pewe AwardMelnikov AwardLifetime Award Outreach Outreach ActivitiesPYRN Meetings International ConferencesRegional Conferences Publications IPA Newsletter - Frozen GroundIPA Country ReportsPPP ReportsConference ProceedingsReports and MinutesHandbookGlossaryOccasional Publications What is Permafrost?International Report \"State of the Arctic Coast 2010\" Products Permafrost Data IPA Permafrost MapGTN-P Workshop 2015GTN-P Workshop 2013GTN-P Workshop 2011TSPCALM Mailing ListCourses (IUCP)Media PrintGalleriesPodcasts Member Area Home About Us History \u00d7 Warning JUser: :_load: Unable to load user with ID: 62 History of the International Permafrost Association 50th Anniversary of the First International Conference on Permafrost The year 2013 marked the 50th anniversary of the First International Conference on Permafrost (ICOP), held at Purdue University\u2019s School of Civil Engineering in West Lafayette, Indiana, USA, 11\u201315 November 1963. The conference was a historic event in that it brought together, for the first time, leading researchers and practitioners from North America and other countries with diverse interests and activities in the study and applications of perennially frozen ground, cold regions engineering and related laboratory investigations. Some 285 registered engineers, researchers, manufacturers and builders participated representing Argentina, Austria, Canada, Germany, Great Britain, Japan, Norway, Poland, Sweden,Switzerland, the USA and the USSR. This was the first post-World War II major contact with a group of senior Soviet frozen ground researchers. The Proceedings is considered to be the first multi-national, English-language collection of papers devoted entirely to permafrost topics. Since 1963, nine additional international conferences have been held: two more in the United States (Fairbanks 1983, 2008), two in the Soviet Union and Russia (Yakutsk 1973, Salekhard 2012), two in Canada (Edmonton 1978, Yellow-knife 1998), and one in Trondheim, Norway (1988), Beijing, China (1993), and Zurich, Switzerland (2003). The International Permafrost Association (IPA) was formed in 1983 and subsequent conferences were under the IPA auspices. Jerry Brown, Past IPA President (2003-2008), wrote a Guest Editorial in the journal Permafrost and Periglacial Processes that can be downloaded here: PDF (377 KB) and together with Julia Stanilovskaya a chapter in the book \"Engineering Geology for Society and Territory \u2013 Volume 7; Education, Professional Ethics and Public Recognition of Engineering Geology\" that can be downloaded here: PDF (376 KB). 25th Anniversary of the IPA The Booklet on the 25 years of the International Permafrost Association entitled \"International Permafrost Association:History and Accomplishments, 1983\u20132008\" was published for the Ninth International Conference on Permafrost (NICOP) and is available as a pdf file: IPA 25th Anniversary Booklet (14.4 MB) The following text is an excerpt from\u00a0 this booklet. This text was compiled by: Jerry Brown, Past President, International Permafrost Association,Woods Hole, Massachusetts, USA Hugh French, Professor Emeritus, Departments of Geography and Earth Sciences, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada and Past President, International Permafrost Association Background The First International Conference on Permafrost (ICOP), held at Purdue University, Indiana, in 1963, was an initiative to promote communication and understanding between Soviet and North American permafrost scientists and engineers. This was the first major contact between Russian and western scientists (Brown and Walker 2007). The Second ICOP was held in Yakutsk, Siberia, in 1973, where it was mutually agreed that further conferences would be advantageous to all concerned. At the Third ICOP in Edmonton, Canada, in 1978, the desirability of establishing an organizational structure that would ensure the continuation of these conferences was discussed. Accordingly, the National Research Council of Canada (NRCC), through its Bureau of International Relations and the Division of Building Research (DBR), established a task force in 1981 to draft a set of organizational rules. This was chaired by Lorne Gold, Head of the DBR, NRCC, and the members were Fred Roots, Science Advisor, Environment Canada, John Fyles, Head of the Division of Terrain Sciences, Geological Survey of Canada, and Hugh French, Chairman, Permafrost Subcommittee, and the NRCC Associate Committee on Geotechnical Research (ACGR). Representatives of the Bureau of International Relations, NRCC, provided advice at meetings of the group. At the Fourth ICOP in 1983, held at the University of Alaska-Fairbanks, Alaska, Hugh French, leader of the Canadian delegation, convened a special meeting of the leaders of the official delegations from the USA, USSR and China. Professor Troy L. P\u00e9w\u00e9 (USA), Academician P. I. Melnikov (USSR), and Professor Shi Yafeng (China) attended this meeting together with advisors. Unofficially, these four countries subsequently became known as the \u2018Big Four\u2019. It was agreed to form an international association.The primary mandate of the newly-formed Association was to organize and promote international conferences on permafrost at regular five-year intervals. A secondary role was to encourage and facilitate the international exchange of scientific information among permafrost scientists and engineers. Three of the first acts of the Association in Fairbanks were to: (1) modify the constitution to allow for a Second Vice-President, and (2) appoint a Nominations Committee in order to allow a new Executive to be elected at the 1988 Conference, and (3) plan to seek affiliation with other international scientific bodies. The Executive Committee consisted of Academician Melnikov, President, Professor P\u00e9w\u00e9, Vice-President, and Professor J. Ross Mackay, Secretary-General. The terms of office were for five years. Dr. Kaare Flaate (Norway) was elected to the Executive Committee as a second Vice-President and Norway agreed to host the Fifth ICOP in Trondheim in 1988.The agreement to form the Association was announced at the closing ceremony. The creation of the IPA Council was also announced and countries wishing to join the Association were asked to name an organization or representative. It was clear that, in addition to four founding members, a number of other countries were interested in becoming members of the IPA. The Council was to meet at regular intervals, minimally at the beginning and end of each international conference on permafrost. The NRCC, through its Bureau of International Relations, had agreed to provide funding to support the activities of the Secretary-General.The detailed history of the IPA is chronicled in its News Bulletin Frozen Ground, which started as informal notes by the Secretary General in 1986, and became a formal publication starting in 1989. All 35 issues are found on the IPA web site www.ipa-permafrost.org. Hereafter, specific issues of Frozen Ground are cross referenced, for example as [FG 30]. The following sections report on the development and accomplishments of the Association and is largely based on the paper in the NICOP proceedings (Brown, French and Cheng 2008). We present both administrative details and some of the major accomplishments of the IPA since its formation in 1983. Administrative Activities {moshide hidden [Council, Executive Committee and Secretariat]|[Council, Executive Committee and Secretariat]} Membership on Council is through adhering national or multinational organizations as full voting members or as non-voting associates or individuals in countries where no Adhering Body exists. The IPA is governed by its Council and elected Executive Committee officers. Membership on past and current Executive Committees is presented in the table on the page referring to IPA officers. The Council currently consists of representatives from 26 Adhering Bodies having an interest in any aspect of theoretical, basic and applied frozen ground research, including permafrost, seasonal frost, artificial freezing and periglacial phenomena. The first Council meeting was in 1987 in Ottawa, Canada, during the XII International Union of Quaternary Research (INQUA) Congress. Subsequent meetings took place at each ICOP and at several other international conferences. Attendance at the first Council meeting on August 5, 1987, included 15 Adhering Bodies together with representatives from France (joined 1988) and Sweden (joined 1990) as observers. Other members soon followed: Denmark (1989), Spain and Southern Africa (1993), Mongolia and Kazakhstan (1995), Austria (1998), Iceland (2003) and New Zealand (2005). Portugal and Romania were approved as members in 2008. In 2011 South Korea and Kyrgyzstan joint the IPA as full adhering bodies. The Constitution and By-laws were adopted at the first Council meeting. Since then, six modifications were approved (December 1992, June 1998, March 2003, June 2005, May 2006, and June 2010). These largely involved membership and working party activities. The Council elects the Executive Committee through a formal nomination process, approves the formation and review activities of Committees, Working Groups, and Task Forces. It also approves the venue for each ICOP. Each National Adhering Body pays an annual membership fee established by Council. Starting in 1990, the Council issued a series of recommendations that include specific activities and topics of international scope (see summaries in Council meeting reports in Frozen Ground). These included statements on mapping, long-term monitoring, modeling, climate change, data acquisition and archiving, terminology, coordination with other international organizations and programs including both the Northern and Southern Hemisphere, and mid- and low-latitude mountains and plateau regions. The Executive Committee was elected by the Council every five years. Starting in 2008 the terms are for four years and the officers are selected by the members of the Committee. Although members do not represent their own country, the four countries with significant areas of permafrost have always been represented on the Committee. A representative from the forthcoming international conference is also a member. A geographic and disciplinary balance of membership is also maintained. The first formal meeting of the Executive Committee took place in Oslo in September 1985 and it has met formally over 35 times. The Secretary General first resided at the University of British Columbia, Canada (J. Ross Mackay, 1983-1993) and then in Washington DC, USA (Jerry Brown, 1993-1999). In 1998 the position of Secretary General was replaced by a Secretariat. This was initially located at the Institute of Geography, University of Copenhagen, Denmark (1999-2001) and then resided at the University Centre on Svalbard (UNIS), Norway (2001-2008). Hanne H. Christiansen was responsible for the Secretariat during that latter period. In all locations, national research agencies and/or institutions have provided financial and in-kind support. Major responsibilities include preparation and distribution of Frozen Ground, maintenance of the IPA webpage, coordination of administrative, Executive Committee and Council affairs, and international representation. The Secretariat is now located at the Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research (Germany) and was led during the last four years by Hugues Lantuit. Based on a new structure of the IPA in 2010 the Secretariat will be strengthened to take on more responsibilities in the management of the association and the secretariat leader became the title of Executive Director. Since 2012 Inga May is holding this position.\u00a0The IPA web was hosted by the Department of Geosciences, University of Oslo and now resides at the Secretariat location, in a cooperation with the Arctic Portal (Iceland). {/moshide} {moshide hidden [International affiliations]|[International affiliations]} The IPA became an Affiliated Organization of the International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS) in July 1989. IPA provides an annual report to IUGS and participates in the International Geological Congress every four years. In 1996 the IPA and the International Geographical Union (IGU) signed an agreement that formalized a joint Periglacial Commission. This agreement recognized the long-time relationships between periglacial and permafrost researchers, the foundations of which have been recorded in the pages of the Polish journal Builetyn Peryglacjalny. The IGU-IPA agreement was modified in 2004 with the formation of the new Commission on Cold Regions Environments.Agreements also exist to share joint working groups, committees, or projects with the International Union of Soil Science (IUSS), the Scientific Committee for Antarctic Research (SCAR), and the International Arctic Science Committee (IASC). A joint Memorandum of Understanding was signed with the two latter organisations (March 2009). A Memorandum of Understanding was signed in 2004 between IPA and the World Climate Research Programme project \u2018Climate and Cryosphere\u2019 (CliC). Although no formal agreement exists with the International Union of Quaternary Research (INQUA), close working relations are maintained with the Quaternary communities. Similarly, ties are maintained with the International Society for Soil Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering (ISSMGE) and the recently formed International Association of Cryospheric Sciences. In 2012 a MoU with the Association of Polar Earlier Career Scientist (APECS) and the Permafost Young Researchers Network (PYRN) was signed as well as with the Univserity of the Arctic (UaA). The IPA also closely collaborate with\u00a0International Association of Engineering Geologists (IAEG). The common task force groups work in structures of IPA and IAEG. They are focused on the problems of\u00a0Engineering geology of permafrost regions. {/moshide} Technical Activities {moshide hidden [Conferences and Workshops]|[Conferences and Workshops]} Starting in 1983, the International Permafrost Association assumed responsibility for scheduling the ICOP meetings at five-year intervals. A written invitation for the proposed conference is required for IPA Council approval. The out-going and in-coming IPA Presidents formally convenes the opening and closing sessions of each conference, respectively. In 1998 an International Advisory Committee for ICOP was formed to facilitate continuity in the planning of conferences. The host country is responsible for the financial support, technical organization, and publications. Field trips in or to permafrost areas are required as part of the program. The host country is responsible for the organization and financing of the conferences. The tenth international conferences to date have been held in seven countries.Over the span of these forty years approximately 3000 individuals from 35 countries have participated in the ten conferences. Short reports on each conference, including numbers of attendees, papers in proceedings, field trips, and related publications for the first eight conferences are presented in the online booklet and in Brown and Walker (2007). A CD containing more than 2000 papers from the nine conferences was distributed at the Ninth International Conference on Permafrost and available online here. In addition a honor roll, provided by Jerry Brown, listing all participants who attended conference one - nine can be found here.From 2008 onwards, conferences will take place on a four-year cycle with an official intervening regional conference. During the Eighth ICOP, the Troy L. P\u00e9w\u00e9 Award was established to recognize the best presentation by a young researcher. Starting in 2008 a second award is presented in honor of P.I. Melnikov for the best engineering report. Additional awards are presented annually at national and regional conferences by the recently organized Permafrost Young Researchers Network (PYRN).The IPA has also sponsored a number of regional permafrost conferences. These include the Fourth Canadian Permafrost Conference (Qu\u00e9bec, 1990), three European permafrost conferences (Rome, 2001; Potsdam, 2005; Longyearbyen, 2010) and the First Asian Conference on Permafrost (Lanzhou, 2006). In addition, the annual Russian geocryology conferences (e.g. Pushchino; Tyumen, Salekhard), and several cryopedology and soils meetings (e.g. Copenhagen, Syktyvkar, Madison, Arkhangelsk) have been sponsored by the IPA.Workshops also play an important role in implementing IPA-related projects. The following are the major such meetings; results are reported in Frozen Ground: November 1994: Oslo, Norway, GGD data workshop December 1995, Hanover, New Hampshire, International workshop on processes and ability to detect change August 1997: Bologna, Italy, 4th IAG M-4: Mountain permafrost and monitoring November 1999: Woods Hole, Massachusetts, Arctic Coastal Dynamics workshop October 2000: St. Petersburg, Russia, Arctic Coastal Dynamics workshop 2000: Fairbanks, Alaska, International workshop on permafrost monitoring and databases September 2001: Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia, International symposium on mountain and arid land permafrost November 2001: Potsdam, Germany, Arctic Coastal Dynamics workshop November 2002: Lewes, Delaware, CALM workshop December 2002: Oslo, Norway, 3rd Arctic Coastal Dynamics workshop November 2003: St. Petersburg, Russia, 4th Arctic Coastal Dynamics workshop October 2004: Montreal, Canada, 5th Arctic Coastal Dynamics workshop September 2004: Longyearbyen, Svalbard, PACE21 workshop November 2004: Madison, Wisconsin, Antarctic workshop August 2006: Lanzhou, China, Asian permafrost mapping workshop October 2006: Groningen, Netherlands, 6th Arctic Coastal Dynamics workshop August 2007: Santa Barbara, California, Antarctic workshop October 2008: Abisko, Sweden, workshop on permafrost and Climate June 2009: Stockholm, Sweden,workshop on Carbon Pools in Permafrost Regions November 2009: Vienna, Austria, workshop on glacier and permafrost hazards November 2010: Potsdam, Germany; MicroPerm workshop November 2011: Potsdam, Germany; GTN-P workshop {/moshide} {moshide hidden [Working Parties]|[Working Parties]} Since 1988 many of the IPA activities between conferences have been undertaken by committees, working groups and task forces (collectively referred to as working parties). Annual reports of working parties are published in Frozen Ground and archived on the IPA website. At the 1988 Council meeting in Trondheim, three standing committees and six working groups were established:Standing Committees: Advisory Committee on Working Groups; Editorial Committee; Finance CommitteeWorking Groups: Mountain Permafrost; Permafrost Terminology; Foundations; Present Global Change and Permafrost; Periglacial Environments; Permafrost DataNew working groups were added and some goals modifiedprior to or at the 1993 Council meeting:Cryosols; Seasonal Freezing and Thawing of Permafrost Areas; Periglacial Processes and EnvironmentsDuring the intervening years and at the 1998 Yellowknife Council meetings, major revisions were made to theorganization of working parties. New guidelines were developed and included the formation of task forces [see FG 22].Standing Committees: Data, Information, and Communication; International Advisory Committee for International Permafrost ConferencesWorking Groups (added or changed scope): Global Change and Permafrost; Southern Hemisphere Permafrost and Periglacial; EnvironmentsCoastal and Offshore Permafrost Task Forces: Rock Glacier Dynamics; Mapping and Distribution Modelling of Mountain Permafrost; Isotope/Geochemisty of PermafrostDuring the 2003 Council meeting several task forces became working groups and existing working groups were redefined. A total of ten working groups, several with subgroups, are presently active and are joint with other international organizations:Standing CommitteesData, Information and Communication; International Advisory Committee for International Permafrost ConferencesWorking Groups Antarctic Permafrost and Periglacial Environments (SCAR); Coastal and Offshore Permafrost (IASC and LOICZ); Cryosols (IUSS); Glaciers and Permafrost Hazards in High; Mountains (IACS); Isotopes and Geochemistry of Permafrost; Mapping and Modeling of Mountain Permafrost; Periglacial Landforms, Processes and Climate (IGU); Permafrost and Climate (IGU); Permafrost Astrobiology; Permafrost Engineering (ISSMFE)Since 1998, working party reports covering the previous five years were published as part of the ICOP program and abstract book. In 2007 a review was undertaken by an ad hoc committee on working parties to provide recommendations on the present activities and future directions. In 2010 the association decided to dedicate a large part of its funds to the newly established Action Groups. These groups will be funded, have limited terms, and will need to focus on the production of clearly defined research outputs. An application process will be publicized soon through the Permalist mailing list. An implicit consequence of the formation of Action Groups is the transformation of Working Groups into Interest Groups. These groups will retain the same mandate than the working groups and will be eligible to form action groups to fund targeted initiatives. Information about past and recent Action groups can be found a the action group section on the IPA website. {/moshide} Major Accomplishments By 1988 the IPA was serving as a catalyst and organizer of several major international activities. {moshide hidden [Database]|[Database]} A common challenge facing many field-oriented disciplines is access to international data sets and the subsequent preservation or archiving of these data. The lack of readily available, international permafrost-related data sets was recognized by the IPA prior to, and during, the 1988 Trondheim conference. A Working Group on Permafrost Data was formed and an international data workshop was subsequently convened in 1994 in Olso. The result was development of the Global Geocryological Database (GGD), the basis of which is identification and description of data sets beginning in a metadata format. The National Snow and Ice Data Center took the lead in populating the GGD with both metadata and data. For the 1998 and 2003 conferences, the compilations of the GGD were provided on CD Roms entitled Circumpolar Active-Layer Permafrost System (Barry et al. 1995; NSIDC 1998; IPA SCDIC 2003; Parsons et al. 2008). The CAPS/GGD products are available on line at the NSIDC Frozen Ground Data Center. {/moshide} {moshide hidden [Terminology]|[Terminology]} By the time the IPA was established it was clear that the major terminological problem associated with permafrost, as defined in North America, Russia, and China, arose from the fact that ground at or below O\u00b0C may, or may not, be frozen. Put simply, permafrost is not necessarily frozen because soil and rock, for a variety of reasons (salts, pressure, etc.), may exist in an unfrozen state at temperatures below O\u00b0C. This prompted the Permafrost Subcommittee of the Associate Committee on Geotechnical Research, NRCC, to establish a terminology working group in 1985. In its report (ACGR, 1988) \u2018cryotic\u2019 terminology was re-introducedin an attempt to accommodate the unfrozen nature of certain permafrost situations. The IPA Council approved a Working Group on Permafrost Terminology in 1988 and encouraged production of a multi-language glossary of permafrost and related ground ice terms (van Everdingen, 1998). Although this glossary did not resolve the problem, the permafrost community has, for the first time in its history, a working document that describes permafrost terminology in twelve languages. This represents a major achievement. {/moshide} {moshide hidden [International permaforst map]|[International permafrost map]} Prior to 1983, the mapping of permafrost had been undertaken using different classifications by different national organizations. The need existed for a circum-arctic map based on a common classification. An informal group representing members of the United States Geological Survey (USGS), the Geological Survey of Canada, and the Institute for Hydrogeology and Engineering Geology (VSEGINGEO), Russia, was spearheaded by the IPA Secretary General (J. Brown) and started work in the early 1990s. A generalized legend based on permafrost continuity, ground ice content, and physiography was applied to existing permafrost maps and, after several meetings and numerous editorial discussions by the authors and the USGS cartographers, a map at 1:10,000,000 was finalized and published (Brown et al., 1997).It was subsequently digitized and made available in ArcInfo (available here). The digitized product has been used extensively by the modeling communities and others involved in climate research. Building on this existing map, a new international map based on spatial and temperature variations of permafrost terrain is a logical next step. In 2012 Gruber published a new permafrost map, with a resoultion of 30 arc-seconds (<1km) on a WGS84 lat/lon grid. During the next four years it is plannend to develop new innovative and accurate maps of permafrost for use by multiple audiences. {/moshide} {moshide hidden [Observational networks]|[Observational networks]} The IPA has taken the leadership in initiating and coordinating several international, long-term monitoring networks and related data acquisition programs. The IPA entered into a cooperative partnership with the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations to facilitate development and coordination of the Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost (Burgess et al. 2000). The GTN-P consists of two components: the borehole measurements or Thermal State of Permafrost (TSP) and the Circumpolar Active Layer Monitoring (CALM) network. Both TSP and CALM are included in the IPA coordinated International Polar Year (IPY) Project 50 \u2018Permafrost Observatory Project: A Contribution to the Thermal State of Permafrost\u2019. This currently consists of 165 CALM sites (Nelson et al. 2004; Shiklomanov et al., 2008) and approximately 500 boreholes temperature sites in both hemispheres. Also included are the boreholes developed under the PACE program (Harris 2008) and the Norwegian TSP boreholes. At least 15 countries are participating in GTN-P, primarily with national funding.A second major network exists in the Arctic Coastal Dynamics (ACD) program. Following a 1999 workshop, a science plan under the Working Group on Coastal and Offshore Permafrost was developed and project status was approved by the International Arctic Science Committee. There are approximately 30 key coastal sites located around the Arctic Oceans. ACD developed a database of several thousand coastal segments. {/moshide} {moshide hidden [Publications]|[Publications]} Publications In addition to those previously mentioned, numerous publications have arisen from IPA working parties, projects and related activities. Some of these include: Bibliographies of published literature (e.g. Brennan 1983, 1988, 1993, Mullins 2003) An annotated bibliography on climate change (Koster et al. 1994) Soil carbon map (Tarnocai et al. 2003) Periglacial manual (IPA web accessible) In addition, the Wiley-Blackwell journal Permafrost and Periglacial Processes (PPP) has published a number of special issues on mountain permafrost (PPP3); climate change (PPP4); gr\u00e8zes lit\u00e9es (PPP6); frozen ground (PPP7); cryostratigraphy (PPP9); cryosols (PPP10); PACE (PPP12); hydrology, climate and ecosystems (PPP14); periglacial processes and instrumentation (PPP14); CALM (PPP15); PACE21: mountain permafrost (PPP15); a special issue for Hugh M. French (PPP16) and a special issue in honor of J. Ross Mackay at the time of his 90th birthday (PPP18); NICOp (PPP19); PYRN (PPP20); Permafrost in the McKenzie Delta (PPP20); IPY (PPP21); Stable Isotops (PPP22); and in honor of Charles Harris (PPP22).Several other journals serve the international geocryology communities. For example, since 2002, the Reports on Polar Research of the Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research (Bremerhaven, Germany) have contained an annual issue devoted to the results of the ACD workshops. Otherjournals have also devoted special issues to IPA-sponsored activities: these include the Norwegian Journal of Geography, Polar Geography and Geology, Southern African Journal of Science, Global and Planetary Change, Cold Regions Science and Technology, and Journal of Geophysical Research. {/moshide} IPA and the International Polar Year (2007\u20132009) Four core coordinated projects were proposed by the IPA and endorsed by the IPY Joint Committee: Project 50: Permafrost Observatory Project: A Contribution to the Thermal State of Permafrost (TSP) Project 33: Antarctic and sub-Antarctic Permafrost, Periglacial and Soil Environments (ANTPAS) Project 90: Arctic Circumpolar Coastal Observatory Network (ACCO-Net) Project 373: Carbon Pools in Permafrost Regions (CAPP) Approximately 50 individual national projects were taking part in these core projects. The overall goals and objectives of IPY-IPA programme were: Obtain standardized permafrost temperature and active layer measurements across all permafrost regions (snapshot) and develop a retrospective database (TSP, ANTPAS) Revise estimates and assess the lability of carbon pools in permafrost regions (CAPP, ANTPAS) Expand and intensify coastal monitoring programmes (ACCO-Net) Improve regional permafrost and soil mapping in the Antarctic, Arctic, Subarctic and mountainous regions (ANTPAS, CAPP, TSP) Establish a periglacial monitoring network (TSP and ANTPAS) Develop and promote permafrost information and educational activities Promote the development of a new generation of permafrost researchers (PYRN, IUCP) As part of the IPA-IPY education and outreach activities, the web-based catalog of International University Courses on Permafrost (IUCP) was developed and contains about 140 courses in ca 20 countries related to permafrost and periglacial topics (Christiansen, Prick and Lantuit, 2007). These include a number of field courses.Initial results from many of the IPA-IPY projects are being reported at the Ninth International Conference on Permafrost and in its Proceedings. Permafrost Young Researchers Network The Permafrost Young Researchers Network (PYRN) was established within the IPA framework in order to create and maintain communications among young researchers involved in permafrost and related research activities. The objectives of the network are to facilitate and strengthen contacts among young scientists in the permafrost community and to provide an integrated single source of information of interest to young researchers (fellowships, conference travel funding, position opportunities, etc.). In addition, the International Polar Year prompted the need for a visible representation of the young permafrost community at the newly formed Youth Steering Committee of the IPY. A PYRN organizational meeting of national representatives was held at Abisko in February 2007. The PYRN website reports on conferences, events, job and graduate positions, research and other topics related to permafrost activities and distributes an electronic newsletter to the young researchers and other readers. See pyrn.ways.org for details.Several on-going projects include a bibliography of student dissertations, a global list of senior researchers involved in permafrost research, and a permafrost drilling and temperature monitoring program based on the IPA TSP protocol. The PYRN Outstanding Presentation Awards are presented at permafrost conferences. Members of PYRN were eligible for NICOP stipends based on senior authored papers and extended abstracts. A total of 81 awards were made. Current PYRN membership (no fee required) is over 2000 from more than 35 countries. Conclusions The International Permafrost Association has established itself as a productive international organization. Geocryology is now recognized as a cold-climate discipline that integrates permafrost science and permafrost engineering. Permafrost is recognized as an important component of the cryosphere.Specific achievements under the IPA included the production of a multi-language glossary, publication of a digitized, circum-arctic map of permafrost and related ground ice conditions, and the establishment of the global geocryological database system and several monitoring networks.The IPA legacy that is resulting from both the IPY and existing activities includes: (i) establishment of long-term networks of active layer and permafrost temperature observatories, (ii) development of a sustainable geocryological database, and (iii) fostering a new generation of geocryologists through theactivities of the Permafrost Young Researchers Network. These collective activities will further develop and sustain international activities, particularly those related to the state and fate of permafrost in relation to a changing climate. Officers Country Members Constitution Resolutions External Relations Standing Committees ANTPAS Education & Outreach History Become a Member Contact: contact@ipa-permafrost.orgThe International Permafrost Association website is designed and hosted by the Arctic PortalCopyright \u00a9 2008-2015 International Permafrost Association All Rights Reserved IPA on Facebook IPA on Twitter IPA on Youtube IPA RSS", "Melting permafrost in the Arctic is unlocking diseases and warping the landscape - Vox clock menu more-arrow no yes Log In or Sign Up Log In Sign Up Future Perfect Explainers The Goods Politics & Policy Culture Science & Health World Identities Energy & Environment Technology Business & Finance First Person Video Podcasts More Future Perfect Explainers The Goods Politics & Policy Culture Science & Health World Identities Energy & Environment Technology Business & Finance First Person Video Podcasts \u2715 Melting permafrost in the Arctic is unlocking diseases and warping the landscape The consequences of climate change can be weird and apocalyptic. By Brian Resnick@B_resnick Updated Feb 6, 2018, 11:13am EST Photography by Johnny Harris Share Tweet Share Share Melting permafrost in the Arctic is unlocking diseases and warping the landscape tweet share Reddit Pocket Flipboard Email The summer sun over Svalbard, Norway, an arctic archipelago\u00a0that\u2019s rapidly changing due to climate change. Johnny Harris / Vox You can find evidence of a changing climate everywhere on Earth. But nowhere are the changes more dramatic than in the Arctic. Our world\u2019s northern polar region is warming twice as fast as the global average. And the consequences are easy to spot. On average, Arctic sea ice extent is shrinking every summer. The Greenland ice sheet is becoming unstable. But perhaps most disturbing are the changes occurring underground in the permafrost. Permafrost is a layer of frozen soil that covers 25 percent of the Northern Hemisphere. It acts like a giant freezer, keeping microbes, carbon, poisonous mercury, and soil locked in place. Now it\u2019s melting. And things are getting weird and creepy: The ground warps, folds, and caves. Roadways built on top of permafrost have becoming wavy roller coasters through the tundra. Long-dormant microbes \u2014 some trapped in the ice for tens of thousands of years \u2014 are beginning to wake up, releasing equally ancient C02, and could potentially come to infect humans with deadly diseases. And the retreating ice is exposing frozen plants that haven\u2019t seen the sun in 45,000 years, as new radiocarbon dating research suggests. A recent Arctic Council report says that 20 percent of the permafrost near the surface may melt by 2040. Already scientists have noticed permafrost temperatures slowly climbing. \u201cIn the 1980s, the temperature of permafrost in Alaska, Russia and other Arctic regions averaged to be almost 18\u00b0F,\u201d the U.S. Geological Survey explained in 2015. \u201cNow the average is just over 28\u00b0F.\u201d A 2010 study in Russia found 0.5\u00b0C to 2\u00b0C of permafrost warming in the past three decades, bringing some locations dangerously close to thawing and pushing the boundary of permafrost regions ever northward. And the depth of the \u201cactive layer\u201d \u2014 the top layer of permafrost that thaws in the summertime \u2014 is growing deeper in the Arctic regions north of Europe, a sign of instability. When it thaws, a Pandora\u2019s box is unleashed. To better understand the strange changes in the permafrost, I spoke with Robert Max Holmes, an earth systems scientist with the Woods Hole Research Center. When I reached him by phone, he was in Bethel, Alaska, a small outpost town 400 miles west of Anchorage, and had just come back from an eight-day research and teaching expedition in the wilderness. A week earlier, Holmes and his students had set up temperature sensors in the soil near their encampment. Their first reading was 0.3\u00b0C. \u201cIt's barely frozen. And we just sort of sat there stunned. You don't know whether to cry or what. Because you're just like: My God, this whole thing is just going to change in a big way.\u201d Here\u2019s how. 1) Permafrost has been frozen for millennia. Thawing it is a huge disruption. The icy mountains near Svalbard, Norway, an arctic archipelago that\u2019s rapidly changing due to climate change. Johnny Harris / Vox The simplest definition of permafrost is ground that has been frozen for at least two years. But it\u2019s so much more than that. In much of the Arctic, that ground has been frozen for tens of thousands of years. And a huge amount of it is frozen \u2014 permafrost rests in 25 percent of all the land area in the Northern Hemisphere. National Snow and Ice Data Center The top few inches (up to a few feet) of the permafrost is what\u2019s known as the \u201cactive layer.\u201d This topsoil does thaw with yearly seasonal changes, and is home to a thriving ecosystem. So how do scientists know there\u2019s permafrost underneath it? \u201cWe have these things called thaw depth probes, which is basically just a T-bar, a steel rod that's a centimeter in diameter and 1.5 meters or so long,\u201d Holmes says. They poke the ground with it. \u201cIt's like pushing a knife through warm butter or something, and then you hit the bottom of the tray, and boom\u201d \u2014 there\u2019s your permafrost. Eventually, if you dig deep enough, the permafrost again thaws due to heat from the Earth\u2019s core. Permafrost is like the bedrock of the Arctic (you literally need jackhammers to break it apart). But rising air temperatures in the region are chipping away at this bedrock. \u201cHalf the volume of permafrost may be frozen water,\u201d Holmes says. \u201cWhen that thaws, the water just runs off. The water may head downhill or the water has a lower volume than is ice, so the ground just slumps and kind of falls apart.\u201d (The New York Times has a great new interactive showing how much permafrost in the Alaska may inevitably melt.) 2) The biggest threat is carbon Longyearbyen, a settlement in Svalbard, Norway, is home to a seed vault intended to protect plant genetic diversity amid a changing climate. Its Arctic location may not be as secure as once thought due to rising temperatures and melting permafrost. Johnny Harris / Vox You can think of the Arctic permafrost as a giant kitchen freezer. If you put organic (carbon-based) matter in your freezer, the food will stay intact. But if the freezer compressor breaks, it will slowly heat up. As it heats up, bacteria begin to eat your food. The bacteria make the food go rotten. And as the bacteria consume the food, they produce carbon dioxide, methane, and other gases and chemicals that smell terrible. For tens of thousands of years, permafrost has acted like a freezer, keeping 1,400 gigatons (billion tons) of plant matter carbon trapped in the soil. (That\u2019s more than double the amount of carbon currently in the atmosphere.) Some of the plant matter is more recent, and some is from glacial ice ages that radically transformed a lush landscape into a tundra. \u201cPlants are growing in permafrost regions, and when those plants die, because of the cold temperature, they don't fully decompose, so some of that organic carbon is left behind,\u201d Holmes says. When the permafrost thaws, \u201cit starts to rot, it starts to decompose, and that's what's releasing carbon dioxide and methane,\u201d he says. This is one reason scientists are so worried about a melting Arctic: When the bacteria turn the carbon in the Arctic into C02 and methane, it accelerates a feedback loop. The more methane and carbon released, the more warming. The more warming ... you get it. A 2014 study in Environmental Research Letters estimates that thawing permafrost could release around 120 gigatons of carbon into the atmosphere by 2100, resulting in 0.29\u00b0C of additional warming (give or take 0.21\u00b0C). By 2300, another study in Nature Geoscience concludes, the melting permafrost and its resulting carbon feedback loops could contribute to 1.69\u00b0C of warming. (That\u2019s on the high end. It could be as low as 0.13\u00b0C of warming.) But these are just estimates, and they come with a good deal of uncertainty. (There\u2019s debate over how much greenhouse gases can be released out of the Arctic, and how long it would take.) It all depends on how quickly the Arctic warms. But the logic here is simple: The more warming, the greater the risk of kick-starting this feedback loop. A study published in Nature Climate Change in April predicted that 1.5 million square miles of permafrost would disappear with every additional 1\u00b0C of warming. And carbon isn\u2019t the only pollutant trapped in the ice. A new study in Geophysical Research Letters finds that the Arctic permafrost is the largest repository of mercury on Earth. Mercury is a potent neurotoxin. And scientists now think there is around 15 million gallons frozen in permafrost soils \u2014 nearly twice the amount of mercury found in all other soil, the ocean, and atmosphere combined. Scientists don\u2019t know how much of this mercury could be released, or when, the Washington Post explains. But they do know this: Continued melting will make it more likely for the mercury to be released, pollute the ocean, and accumulate in the food chain. 3) Ancient microbes are waking up From the air, the arctic still looks pristine and barren. The situation on the ground tells a different story. Johnny Harris / Vox In August 2016, an outbreak of anthrax in Siberia sickened 72 people and took the life of a 12-year-old boy. Health officials pinpointed the outbreak to an unusual source. Abnormally high temperatures had thawed the corpses of long-dead reindeer and other animals. Some of these bodies may have been infected with anthrax, and as Wired explained, the soil in Siberia is normally much too cold to dig deep graves. \u201cThe disease from thawing human and animal remains can get into groundwater that people then drink,\u201d Wired reported. Scientists are worried that as more permafrost thaws, especially in Siberia, there may be more outbreaks of long-dormant anthrax as burial grounds thaw. That\u2019s because the deep freeze of the permafrost doesn\u2019t just keep carbon from escaping \u2014 it keeps microbes intact as well. Permafrost is the place to preserve bacteria and viruses for hundreds of thousands \u2014 if not a million \u2014 years, explains Jean-Michel Claverie, a genomics researcher who studies ancient viruses and bacteria. \u201cIt is dark, it is cold, and it is also without oxygen. \u2026 There is no [ultraviolet] light.\u201d All the bacteria need is a thaw to wake back up. \u201cIf you take a yogurt and put it in permafrost [that remains frozen], I\u2019m sure in 10,000 years from now it still will be good to eat,\u201d he said. Claverie is part of a scientific team that recently determined it\u2019s possible to revive 30,000-year-old viruses trapped in the permafrost. His work is centered on viruses that infect amoebas, not humans. But there\u2019s no reason why a flu virus, smallpox, or some long-lost human infection couldn\u2019t be revived the same way. These microbes are like time travelers \u2014 and they could thrive waking up in an age when humans have lost an immune defense against them. I asked Claverie if there\u2019s an upper limit to how long viruses and (certain types of) bacteria could survive in the permafrost. \u201cThe limit is the limit given by the permafrost,\u201d he explained, meaning he sees no limit. Permafrost is 1,000 meters deep in places, \u201cwhich make it about a million, 1.5 million year old,\u201d he said. The danger here, he emphasized, is not from the slow thawing of the permafrost itself. That is, if the permafrost melts, and we leave the land alone, we\u2019re unlikely to come into contact with ancient deadly diseases. The fear is that the thawing will encourage greater excavation in the Arctic. Mining and other excavation projects will become more appealing as the region grows warmer. And these projects can put workers into contact with some very, very old bugs. The threat is tiny. But it exists. The big lesson is that even viruses thought to be eradicated from Earth \u2014 like smallpox \u2014 may still lurk frozen, somewhere. \u201cWe could actually catch a disease from a Neanderthal\u2019s remains,\u201d Claverie says. \u201cWhich is amazing.\u201d 4) Roadways are warping, foundations are shifting When the permafrost melts, it literally changes the landscape. \u201cOftentimes, permafrost has a great deal of ice in it, so you can get half the volume of that permafrost [that] may be frozen water,\u201d Holmes says. \u201cAnd so when that thaws, the water just runs off, you know? The water may head downhill or the water has a lower volume than is ice, so the ground just slumps and kind of falls apart.\u201d \"The permafrost is dying\": Bethel sees increased shifting of roads and buildingshttps://t.co/VEKObdhhmu pic.twitter.com/KUCrNDXAgd\u2014 Anchorage Daily News (@adndotcom) July 7, 2017 In Bethel, Alaska, roadways are literally rippling and warping as the ground beneath them becomes less solid. In other places, the melting permafrost is creating craters and sinkholes. \u201cYou see buildings that are kind of slumping into the ground; you see that a lot in the Russian Arctic,\u201d Holmes says. Civil engineers are experimenting with new types of pilings and foundations to help keep Arctic buildings on strong footing. There is one crater in Siberia so large it\u2019s gotten the nickname \"doorway to the underworld.\u201d It\u2019s a kilometer long and up to 100 meters deep. And it\u2019s growing larger every year. 5) When we lose the permafrost, we lose a record of natural history Johnny Harris / Vox There are dangers buried in the permafrost. But there are also natural treasures yet to be discovered. The ice preserves all: ancient animal remains and human history in the region. Think of \u00d6tzi, the remarkably preserved 5,000-year-corpse found in the Alps. If he had thawed, what was left of his body would have decomposed, and a window into the world he lived in would have been lost forever. There may be other \u00d6tzis in the Arctic. Or preserved bits of mammoth DNA yet to be discovered. The melting may make some of these treasures briefly accessible \u2014 freed from the ice \u2014 but also threatens to quickly destroy them. According to Scientific American, once a specimen is uncovered and thawed, researchers have a year at most to recover it before it completely breaks down. Are there any benefits to melting permafrost? \u201cOne story I heard of in Bethel is that there are people who are happy that now they can dig a basement,\u201d Holmes says. There are some benefits of thawing permafrost. For one, farming is now possible in parts of Alaska, as NPR reports. And \u201cSo it's not that it's all a bad news story,\u201d Holmes says, \u201cbut I'd say the silver lining is pretty thin and pretty small in relationship to the larger-scale negatives.\u201d Next Up In Explainers Trump is quietly forcing more asylum seekers to wait in Mexico Sen. Brian Schatz introduces a new bill to tax stock trades and curb high-frequency trading The Democratic debate over filibuster reform, explained The chaotic Trump-Kim summit aftermath, explained John Hickenlooper, former Colorado governor and brewpub owner, is running for president The biggest questions about the 2020 Democratic primary, answered Most Read White House response to House Judiciary request makes no attempt to defend Trump on merits Hey, look over there! The bogus \u201cMomo challenge\u201d internet hoax, explained How a viral urban legend swept the globe. How did home cooking become a moral issue? In their new book Pressure Cooker: Why Home Cooking Won\u2019t Solve Our Problems and What We Can Do About It, three academics explain why we\u2019ve put too much emphasis on family dinner. Daylight saving time begins Sunday: 8 things to know about \u201cspringing forward\u201d We push our clocks forward at 2 am Sunday. Here\u2019s why. A Clinton-era centrist Democrat explains why it\u2019s time to give democratic socialists a chance \"The baton rightly passes to our colleagues on our left.\" vox-mark Vox Sentences The news, but shorter, delivered straight to your inbox. Subscribe By signing up, you agree to our Privacy Policy and European users agree to the data transfer policy. For more newsletters, check out our newsletters page. This Article has a component height of 85. The sidebar size is long. The Latest Michael Bloomberg says he\u2019s not running for president By Emily Stewart Moms at Amazon are fighting for child care. The company would benefit from listening. By Chavie Lieber The Senate confirms Allison Rushing, a judicial nominee who once interned for a hate group By Li Zhou Scott Gottlieb was one of the few Trump officials taking on the opioid crisis. Now he\u2019s out. By German Lopez New Trump administration rule will strip funding from Planned Parenthood By Anna North T-Mobile admits it spent $195,000 at Trump hotel while merger awaits government approval By Aaron Rupar Chorus Terms of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Policy GDPR Commitment Communications Preferences Contact Send Us a Tip Masthead About Us Editorial Ethics and Guidelines All Systems Operational Check out our status page for more details. Vox Media Advertise with us Jobs @ Vox Media \u00a9 2019 Vox Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved tweet share", "Permafrost | Starbound Extended story mod Wiki | FANDOM powered by Wikia FANDOM Games Movies TV Video Wikis Explore Wikis Community Central Start a Wiki Search Sign In Don't have an account? Register Start a Wiki Advertisement Extended Story Wiki 251 Pages Add new page Popular pages Most visited articles Enemies and Bosses Items and Weapons The Ancient One Quests and Missions Biomes Status Effects Supervoid Biome Bosses The Ancient One The Ancient Avatar The Ruin Seed The Abyssal Overseer Omega the Quantum Sentry Bot Of Terror Deathvolt Biomes Halloween Voltage Nuclear Wasteland Raging Infernos Dark Abyss Permafrost Supervoid (Mini-Biome) Content Items and Weapons Ranged Melee Staff Mech Parts Other Crafting Materials Armor Sets Monsters Bosses Minibosses Boss Minions Biomes Primary Secondary Quests and Missions Objects Crafting Stations Doors Portals / Teleporters Misc Status Effects Other Guide Currently Known Bugs Explore Wiki Activity Random page Videos Images Discuss in: Biomes Permafrost Edit Classic editor History Comments Share Permafrost Threat Level 6 Star Type(s) Frozen, Firey Hazard Extreme Cold Minibiomes Prism, Ice, Alpine, Supervoid Sub-biomes Midnight, Desert, Tundra, Forest, Dark Abyss SummaryEdit Permafrost is a biome added by Extended Story. It contains various frozen-themed enemies and is where Cryonium Ore is found. Upon beaming on to this planet, the player will be inflicted with the Extreme Cold status effect. To nullify this, the player must wear an Ancient EPP. Biome TilesEdit Main: Smooth Ice Secondary: Frozen Dirt Ice Ores: Coal Dark Matter Gold Diamond Aegisalt Ferozium Violium Solarium Cryonium Ore MonstersEdit Surface of a Permafrost world Wisper Lilodon Capricoat Skimbus Ringram Pulpin Scandroid Bobot Biomes Dark Abyss \u2666 Raging Infernos \u2666 Halloween \u2666 Nuclear Wasteland \u2666 Permafrost \u2666 Voltage Retrieved from \"https://starbound-extended-story-mod.fandom.com/wiki/Permafrost?oldid=1524\" Categories: Biomes Add category Cancel Save Fan Feed More Starbound Extended story mod Wiki 1 Enemies and Bosses 2 Items and Weapons 3 Ruinbuster Explore Wikis Mini 4WD Wiki Attack on Titan Wiki Vikings Wiki Explore Games Movies TV Wikis Follow Us Overview About Careers Press Contact Terms of Use Privacy Policy Global Sitemap Local Sitemap Community Community Central Support Fan Contributor Program WAM Score Help Can't find a community you love? Create your own and start something epic. Start a wiki The FANDOM App Take your favorite fandoms with you and never miss a beat Advertise Media Kit Contact Starbound Extended story mod Wiki is a FANDOM Games Community. View Mobile Site Capt. Marvel Hulk Thor", "Permafrost | geology | Britannica.com ENCYCLOP\u00c6DIA BRITANNICA START YOUR FREE TRIAL Log In \u00b7 Join Demystified Quizzes Galleries Lists On This Day Biographies Newsletters START YOUR FREE TRIAL Search Britannica What are you looking for? Search Click here to search Browse popular topics: Crystal Palace Victoria Monroe Doctrine Kepler's laws of planetary motion Open Door policy Bring fact-checked results to the top of your browser search. Learn More. Permafrostgeology Written By: Troy L. P\u00e9w\u00e9 See Article History Alternative Title: ground ice Permafrost, perennially frozen ground, a naturally occurring material with a temperature colder than 0 \u00b0C (32 \u00b0F) continuously for two or more years. Such a layer of frozen ground is designated exclusively on the basis of temperature. Part or all of its moisture may be unfrozen, depending on the chemical composition of the water or the depression of the freezing point by capillary forces. Permafrost with saline soil moisture, for example, may be colder than 0 \u00b0C for several years but contain no ice and thus not be firmly cemented. Most permafrost, however, is consolidated by ice.Division of subarctic and Arctic regions showing distribution of permafrost and glaciers.Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica, Inc.Permafrost with no water, and thus no ice, is termed dry permafrost. The upper surface of permafrost is called the permafrost table. In permafrost areas the surface layer of ground that freezes in the winter (seasonally frozen ground) and thaws in summer is called the active layer. The thickness of the active layer depends mainly on the moisture content, varying from less than a foot in thickness in wet, organic sediments to several feet in well-drained gravels.Permafrost forms and exists in a climate where the mean annual air temperature is 0 \u00b0C or colder. Such a climate is generally characterized by long, cold winters with little snow and short, relatively dry, cool summers. Permafrost, therefore, is widespread in the Arctic, sub-Arctic, and Antarctica. It is estimated to underlie 20 percent of the world\u2019s land surface. Read More on This Topic glacial landform: Permafrost, patterned ground, solifluction deposits, and pingos Permafrost is ground that remains perennially frozen (see permafrost). It covers about 20\u201325 percent of the Earth\u2019s land surface today. The \u201cactive layer\u201d of soil close to the surface of permafrost regions undergoes many seasonal and daily freeze-thaw\u2026 Distribution in the Northern Hemisphere Permafrost zones Permafrost is widespread in the northern part of the Northern Hemisphere, where it occurs in 85 percent of Alaska, 55 percent of Russia and Canada, and probably all of Antarctica. Permafrost is more widespread and extends to greater depths in the north than in the south. It is 1,500 metres (5,000 feet) thick in northern Siberia, 740 metres thick in northern Alaska, and thins progressively toward the south. Most permafrost can be differentiated into two broad zones; the continuous and the discontinuous, referring to the lateral continuity of permafrost. In the continuous zone of the far north, permafrost is nearly everywhere present except under the lakes and rivers that do not freeze to the bottom. The discontinuous zone includes numerous permafrost-free areas that increase progressively in size and number from north to south. Near the southern boundary, only rare patches of permafrost have been found to exist. In addition to its widespread occurrence in the Arctic and subarctic areas of the Earth, permafrost also exists at lower latitudes in areas of high elevation. This type of perennially frozen ground is called Alpine permafrost. Although data from high plateaus and mountains are scarce, measurements taken below the active surface layer indicate zones where temperatures of 0 \u00b0C or colder persist for two or more years. The largest area of Alpine permafrost is in western China, where 1,500,000 square kilometres (580,000 square miles) of permafrost are known to exist. In the contiguous United States, Alpine permafrost is limited to about 100,000 square kilometres in the high mountains of the west. Permafrost occurs at elevations as low as 2,500 metres in the northern states and at about 3,500 metres in Arizona. A unique occurrence of permafrost\u2014one that has no analogue on land\u2014lies under the Arctic Ocean, on the northern continental shelves of North America and Eurasia. This is known as subsea or offshore permafrost. Study of permafrost Although the existence of permafrost had been known to the inhabitants of Siberia for centuries, scientists of the Western world did not take seriously the isolated reports of a great thickness of frozen ground existing under northern forest and grasslands until 1836. Then, Alexander Theodor von Middendorff measured temperatures to depths of approximately 100 metres of permafrost in the Shargin shaft, an unsuccessful well dug for the governor of the Russian-Alaskan Trading Company, at Yakutsk, and estimated that the permafrost was 215 metres thick. Since the late 19th century, Russian scientists and engineers have actively studied permafrost and applied the results of their learning to the development of Russia\u2019s north. In a similar way, prospectors and explorers were aware of permafrost in the northern regions of North America for many years, but it was not until after World War II that systematic studies of perennially frozen ground were undertaken by scientists and engineers in the United States and Canada. Since exploitation of the great petroleum resources on the northern continental shelves began in earnest in the 1970s, investigations into subsea permafrost have progressed even more rapidly than have studies of permafrost on land. Alpine permafrost studies had their beginning in the study of rock glaciers in the Alps of Switzerland. Although ice was known to exist in rock glaciers, it was not until after World War II that investigation by geophysical methods clearly demonstrated slow movement of perennial ice\u2014i.e., permafrost. In the 1970s and \u201980s, detailed geophysical work and temperature and borehole examination of mountain permafrost began in Russia, China, and Scandinavia, especially with regard to construction in high mountain and plateau areas. Origin and stability of permafrost Air temperature and ground temperature In areas where the mean annual air temperature becomes colder than 0 \u00b0C, some of the ground frozen in the winter will not be completely thawed in the summer; therefore, a layer of permafrost will form and continue to grow downward gradually each year from the seasonally frozen ground. The permafrost layer will become thicker each winter, its thickness controlled by the thermal balance between the heat flow from the Earth\u2019s interior and that flowing outward into the atmosphere. This balance depends on the mean annual air temperature and the geothermal gradient. The average geothermal gradient is an increase of 1 \u00b0C (1.8 \u00b0F) for every 30 to 60 metres of depth. Eventually the thickening permafrost layer reaches an equilibrium depth at which the amount of geothermal heat reaching the permafrost is on the average equal to that lost to the atmosphere. Thousands of years are required to attain a state of equilibrium where permafrost is hundreds of feet thick. The annual fluctuation of air temperature from winter to summer is reflected in a subdued manner in the upper few metres of the ground. This fluctuation diminishes rapidly with depth, being only a few degrees at 7.5 metres, and is barely detectable at 15 metres. The level of zero amplitude, at which fluctuations are hardly detectable, is 9 to 15 metres. If the permafrost is in thermal equilibrium, the temperature at the level of zero amplitude is generally regarded as the minimum temperature of the permafrost. Below this depth the temperature increases steadily under the influence of heat from the Earth\u2019s interior. The temperature of permafrost at the depth of minimum annual seasonal change varies from near 0 \u00b0C at the southern limit of permafrost to \u221210 \u00b0C (14 \u00b0F) in northern Alaska and \u221213 \u00b0C (9 \u00b0F) in northeastern Siberia. As the climate becomes colder or warmer, but maintaining a mean annual temperature colder than 0 \u00b0C, the temperature of the permafrost correspondingly rises or declines, resulting in changes in the position of the base of permafrost. The position of the top of permafrost will be lowered by thawing when the climate warms to a mean annual air temperature warmer than 0 \u00b0C. The rate at which the base or top of permafrost is changed depends not only on the amount of climatic fluctuation but also on the amount of ice in the ground and the composition of the ground, conditions that in part control the geothermal gradient. If the geothermal gradient is known and if the surface temperature remains stable for a long period of time, it is, therefore, possible to predict from a knowledge of the mean annual air temperature the thickness of permafrost in a particular area that is remote from bodies of water. Climatic change Permafrost is the result of present climate. Many temperature profiles show, however, that permafrost is not in equilibrium with present climate at the sites of measurement. Some areas show, for example, that climatic warming since the last third of the 19th century has caused a warming of the permafrost to a depth of more than 100 metres. In such areas much of the permafrost is a product of a colder, former climate.melting permafrost: avalanchesLearn about researchers studying melting permafrost on mountains in order to predict and protect against avalanches.Contunico \u00a9 ZDF Enterprises GmbH, Mainz The distribution and characteristics of subsea permafrost point to a similar origin. At the height of the glacial epoch, especially about 20,000 years ago, most of the continental shelf in the Arctic Ocean was exposed to polar climates for thousands of years. These climates caused cold permafrost to form to depths of more than 700 metres. Subsequently, within the past 10,000 years, the Arctic Ocean rose and advanced over a frozen landscape to produce a degrading relict subsea permafrost. The perennially frozen ground is no longer exposed to a cold atmosphere, and the salt water has caused a reduction in strength and consequent melting of the ice-rich permafrost (which is bonded by freshwater ice). The temperature of subsea permafrost, near \u22121 \u00b0C (30 \u00b0F), is no longer as low as it was in glacial times and is therefore sensitive to warming from geothermal heat and to the encroaching activities of humans. It is thought that permafrost first occurred in conjunction with the onset of glacial conditions about three million years ago, during the late Pliocene Epoch. In the subarctic at least, most permafrost probably disappeared during interglacial times and reappeared in glacial times. Most existing permafrost in the subarctic probably formed in the cold (glacial) period of the past 100,000 years. Local thickness The thickness and areal distribution of permafrost are directly affected by snow and vegetation cover, topography, bodies of water, the interior heat of the Earth, and the temperature of the atmosphere, as mentioned earlier. Effects of climate The most conspicuous change in thickness of permafrost is related to climate. At Barrow, Alaska, U.S., the mean annual air temperature is \u221212 \u00b0C (10 \u00b0F), and the thickness is 400 metres. At Fairbanks, Alaska, in the discontinuous zone of permafrost in central Alaska, the mean annual air temperature is \u22123 \u00b0C (27 \u00b0F), and the thickness is about 90 metres. Near the southern border of permafrost, the mean annual air temperature is about 0 or \u22121 \u00b0C, and the perennially frozen ground is only a few feet thick. If the mean annual air temperature is the same in two areas, the permafrost will be thicker where the conductivity of the ground is higher and the geothermal gradient is less. A.H. Lachenbruch of the U.S. Geological Survey reports an interesting example from northern Alaska. The mean annual air temperatures at Cape Simpson and Prudhoe Bay are similar, but permafrost thickness is 275 metres at Cape Simpson and about 650 metres at Prudhoe Bay because rocks at Prudhoe Bay are more siliceous and have a higher conductivity and a lower geothermal gradient than rocks at Cape Simpson. Effects of water bodies Bodies of water, lakes, rivers, and the sea have a profound effect on the distribution of permafrost. A deep lake that does not freeze to the bottom during the winter will be underlain by a zone of thawed material. If the minimum horizontal dimension of the deep lake is about twice as much as the thickness of permafrost nearby, there probably exists an unfrozen vertical zone extending all the way to the bottom of permafrost. Such thawed areas extending all the way through permafrost are widespread under rivers and sites of recent rivers in the discontinuous zone of permafrost and under major, deep rivers in the far north. Under the wide floodplains of rivers in the subarctic, the permafrost is sporadically distributed both laterally and vertically. Small, shallow lakes that freeze to the bottom each winter are underlain by a zone of thawed material, but the thawed zone does not completely penetrate permafrost except near the southern border of permafrost. Effects of solar radiation, vegetation, and snow cover Inasmuch as south-facing hillslopes receive more incoming solar energy per unit area than other slopes, they are warmer; permafrost is generally absent on these in the discontinuous zone and is thinner in the continuous zone. The main role of vegetation in permafrost areas is to shield perennially frozen ground from solar energy. Vegetation is an excellent insulating medium and removal or disturbance of it, either by natural processes or by humans, causes thawing of the underlying permafrost. In the continuous zone the permafrost table may merely be lowered by the disturbance of vegetation, but in a discontinuous zone permafrost may be completely destroyed in certain areas. Snow cover also influences heat flow between the ground and the atmosphere and therefore affects the distribution of permafrost. If the net effect of timely snowfalls is to prevent heat from leaving the ground in the cold winter, permafrost becomes warmer. Actually, local differences in vegetation and snowfall in areas of thin and warm permafrost are critical for the formation and existence of the perennially frozen ground. Permafrost is not present in areas of the world where great snow thicknesses persist throughout most of the winter. Ice content Types of ground ice The ice content of permafrost is probably the most important feature of permafrost affecting human life in the north. Ice in the perennially frozen ground exists in various sizes and shapes and has definite distribution characteristics. The forms of ground ice can be grouped into five main types: (1) pore ice, (2) segregated, or Taber, ice, (3) foliated, or wedge, ice, (4) pingo ice, and (5) buried ice. 1. Pore ice, which fills or partially fills pore spaces in the ground, is formed by pore water freezing in situ with no addition of water. The ground contains no more water in the solid state than it could hold in the liquid state. 2. Segregated, or Taber, ice includes ice films, seams, lenses, pods, or layers generally 0.15 to 13 centimetres (0.06 to 5 inches) thick that grow in the ground by drawing in water as the ground freezes. Small ice segregations are the least spectacular but one of the most extensive types of ground ice, and engineers and geologists interested in ice growth and its effect on engineering structures have studied them considerably. Such observers generally accept the principle of bringing water to a growing ice crystal, but they do not completely agree as to the mechanics of the processes. Pore ice and Taber ice occur both in seasonally frozen ground and in permafrost. 3. Foliated ground ice, or wedge ice, is the term for large masses of ice growing in thermal contraction cracks in permafrost. 4. Pingo ice is clear, or relatively clear, and occurs in permafrost more or less horizontally or in lens-shaped masses. Such ice originates from groundwater under hydrostatic pressure. 5. Buried ice in permafrost includes buried sea, lake, and river ice and recrystallized snow, as well as buried blocks of glacier ice in permafrost climate. World estimates of the amount of ice in permafrost vary from 200,000 to 500,000 cubic kilometres (49,000 to 122,000 cubic miles), or less than 1 percent of the total volume of the Earth. It has been estimated that 10 percent by volume of the upper 3 metres of permafrost on the northern Coastal Plain of Alaska is composed of foliated ground ice (ice wedges). Taber ice is the most extensive type of ground ice, and in places it represents 75 percent of the ground by volume. It is calculated that the pore and Taber ice content in the depth between 0.5 and 3 metres (surface to 0.5 metre is seasonally thawed) is 61 percent by volume, and between 3 and 9 metres it is 41 percent. The total amount of pingo ice is less than 0.1 percent of the permafrost. The total ice content in the permafrost of the Arctic Coastal Plain of Alaska is estimated to be 1,500 cubic kilometres, and below 9 metres most of that is present as pore ice. Ice wedges The most conspicuous and controversial type of ground ice in permafrost is that formed in large ice wedges or masses with parallel or subparallel foliation structures. Most foliated ice masses occur as wedge-shaped, vertical, or inclined sheets or dikes 2.5 centimetres to 3 metres wide and 0.3 to 9 metres high when viewed in transverse cross section. Some masses seen on the face of frozen cliffs may appear as horizontal bodies a few centimetres to 3 metres in thickness and 0.3 to 14 metres long, but the true shape of these ice wedges can be seen only in three dimensions. Ice wedges are parts of polygonal networks of ice enclosing cells of frozen ground 3 to 30 metres or more in diameter. Origins The origin of ground ice was first studied in Siberia, and discussions in print of the origin of large ground-ice masses in perennially frozen ground of North America have gone on since Otto von Kotzebue recorded ground ice in 1816 at a spot now called Elephant\u2019s Point in Eschscholtz Bay of Seward Peninsula. The theory for the origin of ice wedges now generally accepted is the thermal contraction theory that, during the cold winter, polygonal thermal contraction cracks, a centimetre or two wide and a few metres deep, form in the frozen ground; then when, in early spring, water from the melting snow runs down these tension cracks and freezes, a vertical vein of ice is produced that penetrates into permafrost; when the permafrost warms and re-expands during the following summer, horizontal compression produces upturning of the frozen sediment by plastic deformation; then during the next winter, renewed thermal tension reopens the vertical ice-cemented crack, which may be a zone of weakness; another increment of ice is added in the spring when meltwater again enters and freezes. Over the years the vertical wedge-shaped mass of ice is produced. Active wedges, inactive wedges, and ice-wedge casts Ice wedges may be classified as active, inactive, and ice-wedge casts. Active ice wedges are those that are actively growing. The wedge may not crack every year, but during many or most years cracking does occur, and an increment of ice is added. Ice wedges require a much more rigorous climate to grow than does permafrost. The permafrost table must be chilled to \u221215 to \u221220 \u00b0C (5 to \u22124 \u00b0F) for contraction cracks to form. On the average, it is assumed that ice wedges generally grow in a climate where the mean annual air temperature is \u22126 or \u22128 \u00b0C (21 or 18 \u00b0F) or colder. In regions with a general mean annual temperature only slightly warmer than \u22126 \u00b0C, ice wedges occasionally form in restricted cold microclimate areas or during cold periods of a few years\u2019 duration. The area of active ice wedges appears to roughly coincide with the continuous permafrost zone. From north to south across the permafrost area in North America, a decreasing number of wedges crack frequently. The line dividing zones of active and inactive ice wedges is arbitrarily placed at the position where it is thought most wedges do not frequently crack. Inactive ice wedges are those that are no longer growing. The wedge does not crack in winter and, therefore, no new ice is added. A gradation between active ice wedges and inactive ice wedges occurs in those wedges that crack rarely. Inactive ice wedges have no ice seam or crack extending from the wedge upward to the surface in the spring. The wedge top may be flat, especially if thawing has lowered the upper surface of the wedge at some time in the past. Ice wedges in the world are of several ages, but none appear older than the onset of the last major cold period, about 100,000 years ago. Wedges dated by radiocarbon analyses range from 3,000 to 32,000 years in age. In many places in the now temperate latitudes of the world, in areas of past permafrost, ice wedges have melted, and resulting voids have been filled with sediments collapsing from above and the sides. These ice-wedge casts are important as paleoclimatic indicators and indicate a climate of the past with at least a mean annual air temperature of \u22126 or \u22128 \u00b0C or colder. Page 1 of 2 Next page Surface manifestations of permafrost and seasonally frozen ground Learn More in these related Britannica articles: glacial landform: Permafrost, patterned ground, solifluction deposits, and pingos Permafrost is ground that remains perennially frozen (see permafrost). It covers about 20\u201325 percent of the Earth\u2019s land surface today. The \u201cactive layer\u201d of soil close to the surface of permafrost regions undergoes many seasonal and daily freeze-thaw\u2026 Canada: Tundra The permafrost (persistently frozen ground) is easily damaged by heavy equipment and by oil spills. The Inuit, who fish, hunt, and trap for a living, are directly affected by abuses of the ecology.\u2026 Arctic: Terrain Permanently frozen ground (permafrost) covers nearly one-quarter of the Earth\u2019s surface. In northern Alaska and Canada scattered observations suggest that permafrost is 800 to 1,500 feet deep; it is generally deeper in northern Siberia. The deepest known permafrost is in northern Siberia, where it exceeds 2,000 feet. The\u2026 North America: Temperature \u2026has permanently frozen subsoil (permafrost) and is under snow and ice most of the year. The frequently frozen seas interlacing the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, together with innumerable northern lakes, allow for an enormous chilling effect on the air above, and the temperatures for these huge regions are 6 to\u2026 global warming: Carbon cycle feedbacks \u2026of the warming of Arctic permafrost (on land) and further methane release at the continental margins of the oceans (a few hundred metres below sea level). The current average atmospheric methane concentration of 1,750 ppb is equivalent to 3.5 gigatons (3.5 billion tons) of carbon. There are at least 400\u2026 ADDITIONAL MEDIAMore About Permafrost14 references found in Britannica articlesAssorted Referenceshydrates In hydrateice formation In ice formationperiglacial landforms In glacial landform: Permafrost, patterned ground, solifluction deposits, and pingosPleistocene Epoch In Pleistocene Epoch: Periglacial environmentspolar barrens and tundra In tundra: Soils In tundra: Effects of human activities and climate change In polar ecosystem: Polar environmentspotential methane emission In global warming: Carbon cycle feedbackspresence in Gelisol In Gelisoltaiga In taiga: SoilsView More Additional Reading Article History Article Contributors Feedback Corrections? Updates? Help us improve this article! Contact our editors with your feedback. Permafrost Quick Facts View Media Page related topicsIce formation Pingo Thermokarst Pingo ice Inactive ice wedge Hydrolaccolith Open-system pingo Ice-wedge cast Active ice wedge Closed-system pingo Similar Topics Glacier Iceberg Ice in lakes and rivers Sea ice Polynya Ice jam Pack ice Featured On Britannica Unbound / History Britannica Celebrates Women\u2019s History Month Quiz / Literature & Language The Bront\u00eb Sisters Companion / Science The Anthropocene Epoch: Adding Humans to the Chart of Geologic Time Demystified / Science What Causes the Northern and Southern Lights? Britannica Lists & Quizzes Science Quiz Biodiversity Loss Animals List Gorilla gorilla, Sula sula, and Other Animals Whose Names Are Tautonyms\u2014the Same for Genus and Species History Quiz Women\u2019s History: Famous Firsts History List Military Commanders of World War I Trending Topics Crystal Palace Victoria Monroe Doctrine Kepler's laws of planetary motion Open Door policy Black Death F. Scott Fitzgerald James Watt Agricultural Adjustment Administration Mexican Revolution Connect with Britannica Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Pinterest IntroductionDistribution in the Northern HemispherePermafrost zonesStudy of permafrostOrigin and stability of permafrostAir temperature and ground temperatureClimatic changeLocal thicknessEffects of climateEffects of water bodiesEffects of solar radiation, vegetation, and snow coverIce contentTypes of ground iceIce wedgesOriginsActive wedges, inactive wedges, and ice-wedge castsSurface manifestations of permafrost and seasonally frozen groundAreas underlain by permafrostPolygonal groundThermokarst formationsPingosFeatures related to seasonal frostPatterned groundSoil flowProblems posed by permafrostPermafrost engineeringGeneral issuesPermafrost thawing and frost heavingDevelopment in permafrost areasStructures on pilesHighways and railroadsAgricultureOffshore structures Edit Mode Permafrost Geology Tips for Editing Leave Edit Mode Submit Tips For Editing We welcome suggested improvements to any of our articles. You can make it easier for us to review and, hopefully, publish your contribution by keeping a few points in mind. Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica articles are written in a neutral objective tone for a general audience. You may find it helpful to search within the site to see how similar or related subjects are covered. Any text you add should be original, not copied from other sources. At the bottom of the article, feel free to list any sources that support your changes, so that we can fully understand their context. (Internet URLs are the best.) Your contribution may be further edited by our staff, and its publication is subject to our final approval. Unfortunately, our editorial approach may not be able to accommodate all contributions. Submit Thank You for Your Contribution! Our editors will review what you've submitted, and if it meets our criteria, we'll add it to the article. Please note that our editors may make some formatting changes or correct spelling or grammatical errors, and may also contact you if any clarifications are needed. Uh Oh There was a problem with your submission. Please try again later. Close Keep Exploring Britannica Volcano Volcano, vent in the crust of the Earth or another planet or satellite, from which issue eruptions of\u2026 Read this Article Fascism Fascism, political ideology and mass movement that dominated many parts of central, southern, and eastern\u2026 Read this Article English language English language, West Germanic language of the Indo-European language family that is closely related\u2026 Read this Article View More Stay Connected Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Pinterest Newsletters About Us About Our Ads Partner Program Contact Us Privacy Policy Terms of Use \u00a92019 Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica, Inc. Menu Home Demystified Quizzes Galleries Lists On This Day Biographies Newsletters Login Join Contents Contents Page 1 of 2 Permafrost geology Article Media Print Print Please select which sections you would like to print: Table Of Contents Cite Share SHARE Facebook Twitter Feedback Feedback Corrections? Updates? Omissions? Let us know if you have suggestions to improve this article (requires login). Select feedback type: Select a type (Required) Factual Correction Spelling/Grammar Correction Link Correction Additional Information Other Submit Feedback If you prefer to suggest your own revision of the article, you can go to edit mode (requires login). Thank you for your feedback Our editors will review what you\u2019ve submitted and determine whether to revise the article. Join Britannica's Publishing Partner Program and our community of experts to gain a global audience for your work! Share SHARE Facebook Twitter Search \u00d7 close Britannica Celebrates 100 Women Trailblazers"]}